Al?DES AEGYPTI (L.) 
THE YELLOW FEVER MOSQUITO 
AEDES AEGYPTI CL.> 
‘THE YELLOW FEVER MOSQUITO 
ITS LIFE HISTORY, BIONOMICS 
AND STRUCTURE 
BY 
SIR S. RICKARD CHRISTOPHERS 
C.I.E., O.B.E., F.R.S., I.M.S. (retd.) 
Member of the Malaria Commission of the Royal Society and 
Colonial Ofice, 1899-1902. Late Ocfficer in Charge 
Central Malaria Bureau, India 
CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1960 
PUBLISHED BY 
THE SYNDICS OF THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W. 1 
American Branch: 32 East 57th Street, New York 22, N.Y. 
h 
&.d 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1960 
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge 
(Brooke Crutchley, University Printer) 
CONTENTS 
Preface page xi 
I I HISTORICAL 
(a) The name ‘mosquito’ 
(b) Early writings on the mosquito 
(c) The mosquito as a natural history object 
(d) Early observations on structure 
(e) Early systematic work on mosquitoes 
cf> Research on A$de,s aegypti and its role in disease 
II SYSTEMATIC 
(4 Synonymy 
(b) Systematic position and identification 
(c) Varieties, strains, hybrids, gynandromorphs and mutants 
(d) Geographical distribution 
(e) Palaeontological record 
III BIONOMICAL 54 
(a) Life history 54 
(b) Breeding places 57 
(c) Natural enemies 59 
(d> Parasites 63 
IV MEDICAL 
(a) Relation to disease 
(b) Control and protection 
V TECHNIQUE 
(a) Apparatus 
(b) The culture medium 
(c) Rearing and maintenance 
(6) Feeding for egg stock 
(e) Manipulation of eggs 
(f> Manipulation of larvae and pupae 
(g) Manipulation of adults 
(h) Sectioning 
(i) Other special techniques 
VI THE EGG 131 3 
5 
7 
8 
10 
21 
21 
24 
27 
35 
43 
77 
77 
84 
100 
100 
108 
110 
111 
112 
115 
119 
122 
125 
External characters 
Structure 
Physical characters 
Changes following oviposition 
Viability of eggs under different conditions 
Physiology of the egg 
V 131 
134 
138 
143 
147 
153 
CONTENTS 
VII ECLOSION 
(a) The act of hatching 
(b) Mechanism of hatching 
(c) Conditions affecting hatching 
(d> Incubation period and hatching time 
(e) Residual eggs 
cf) Hatching response of normal eggs 
(g) Hatching response of residual eggs 
VIII EMBRYOLOGY 
General observations on development 
Cleavage and formation of the blastoderm 
The germ-band and embryonic membranes 
Formation of the embryo 
Organogeny 
IX THE LARVA 
(a) General description 
(b) The head capsule and related structures 
(c) Thoracic and abdominal segments 
(d> The larval chaetotaxy 
(e) The terminal spiracles and associated structures 
X THE LARVAL INSTARS 
(4 
@I 
(4 
(4 
(4 
0 
(g) 
XI THE LA 
(a) 
(b) 
(4 
(4 
(4 
cf> 
(d 
(4 
(9 
( j) General remarks on the instars 
Larval ecdysis 
The first instar larva 
The later instars 
The prepupa 
Duration of the larval stages 
Pupation 
RVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
Physical characters of the larva 
Hydrostatic balance 
Movements 
Feeding 
Reaction to light and other stimuli 
Resistance to submersion 
Food requirements of the larva 
Effect of temperature 
Effect of starvation and overcrowding 
Effect of salt, pH, soap and chemicals 
XII GROWTH 
(a) General features of larval growth 
(b) Linear measurements of instars at pre- and post-ecdysis 
vi page 158 
158 
159 
165 
170 
172 
174 
174 
177 
177 
179 
183 
185 
190 
194 
194 
197 
208 
209 
218 
227 
227 
231 
233 
238 
242 
245 
247 
251 
251 
253 
255 
256 
257 
259 
260 
262 
266 
268 
276 
276 
278 
CONTENTS 
(c) Weight of instars at pre- and post-ecdysis 
(d) Measurement of growth in cultures 
(e) Characters of the growth curve 
XIII THE LARVA: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 287 
(a) The alimentary canal 287 
(b) The tracheal system 298 
(c) The muscular system 305 
XIV THE LARVA: INTERNAL STRUCTURE (Cont.) 320 
(d) The nervous system 320 
(e) Special sense organs 325 
df) Circulatory system and associated tissues 329 
(g) The retrocerebral complex and the corpora allata 341 
(h) The excretory system 343 
(i) The reproductive system 345 
XV THE PUPA 
(a) General description and external characters 
(b) Chaetotaxy of the pupa 
(c) The tracheal, muscular and other systems 
XVI THE PUPA (Cont.) 382 
(a) Physical characters 382 
(b) The pupal cuticle 384 
(c) Behaviour and viability 385 
(6) Emergence 388 
XVII THE IMAGO 
(a) General description 
(b) Attitude 
(c) Body shape and proportions 
(d) Weight 
(e) Correlation of wing length and weight 
(f> Other physical data relating to the imago 
XVIII THE IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 418 
(a) The head capsule 418 
(b) The mouth-parts 425 
(c) The neck and thorax 431 
XIX THE IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS (Cont.) 440 
(d) The thoracic appendages 440 
(e) The abdomen 454 
(f) The male terminalia 456 
(g) The female terminalia 464 
XX THE IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
(a) Nature of food 
(b) Time from emergence to first blood meal 
vii page 281 
282 
285 
355 
355 
364 
367 
397 
397 
405 
406 
410 
412 
415 
468 
468 
471 
(4 
(4 
(4 
(.f) 
kl CONTENTS 
Time of subsequent blood feeds page 472 
Time of day of feeding 472 
Effect of temperature and of some other conditions on feeding 474 
Chemical attractants and repellents 476 
Biting rate 479 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
(4 Description of the act of feeding 
(8 Mechanism of feeding 
(4 The gorged insect 
(4 The functions of the diverticula 
(e) Salivary gland secretion 
(f) Amount of blood taken 
(g) Rate of digestion 
(4 Behaviour of males during the blood feed 
(9 Reaction following bites 
XXII MATING AND OVIPOSITION 499 
(a) The sexes 499 
(b) Copulation and fertilisation 502 
(c) Oviposition 504 
XXIII FLIGHT 515 
(a) Speed and range of flight 515 
(b) Mechanism of flight 517 
(c) The halteres 520 
(6) Wing-stroke frequency 520 
(e) Other observations on the wings in flight 525 
(j’) Attitude in flight 527 
XXIV THE IMAGO: SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 530 
(a) Reaction to light and visual response 530 
(b) Reaction to smell 533 
(c) Reaction to sound 535 
(d> Reaction to heat 536 
(e) Reaction to moisture 539 
(j) Stimuli connected with feeding 541 
(g) Stimuli connected with oviposition 543 
XXV VIABILITY UNDER DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
Normal duration of life 
Effect of low temperature 
Effect of high temperature and the thermal death point 
Effect of humidity 
Insecticides 
Repellents 
. . . 
Vlll 484 
484 
486 
488 
489 
491 
492 
493 
494 
494 
548 
548 
550 
551 
552 
554 
559 
CONTENTS 
XXVI THE IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
(a) The alimentary canal 
(b) The muscular system 
XXVII THE IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE (Cont.) 600 
(c) The tracheal system 600 
(d) The circulatory system and associated tissues 614 
XXVIII THE IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL 
COMPLEX 
(e) The nervous system 
(f> The retrocerebral complex 
XXIX THE IMAGO: SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 648 
(g) Special sense organs 648 
XXX THE IMAGO: THE EXCRETORY AND REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS 
(h) The excretory system 
(i) The female reproductive system . 
(j) The male reproductive system 
XXX1 THE IMAGO: PHYSIOLOGY 688 
(a) Genetics and chromosomal structure 688 
(b) H ormones 692 
(c) Reserves 695 
(d) The integument 698 
(e) Respiration 701 
(f) Digestion 704 
(g) Circulation and haemolymph 708 page 564 
564 
581 
626 
626 
643 
667 
667 
671 
680 
Addenda 717 
Index 721 
ix 

PREFACE 
A few words of explanation seem desirable regarding the ground covered by this book and 
to make acknowledgement of help received. 
As the title indicates, the book gives an account of the mosquito AL;des aegypti (L.). 
Such an account of an important and much-studied species of mosquito it is hoped may be 
of interest and useful as a, work of reference to those engaged in work on the mosquito in 
the laboratory or in the many connections in which A. aegypti now has a place. 
As a type for much that is known about mosquitoes A. aegypti has many qualifications. 
Its history is closely linked with that of early research on mosquitoes and their systematic 
study. Its distribution and possible source of origin are still subjects of great interest. More 
than any other single species of mosquito, A. aegypti has been cultivated and used in the 
laboratory for research on mosquito structure and bionomics and on mosquito behaviour 
and reactions. The species is extensively used as a test insect in the evaluation of insecticides 
and repellents and in general as a useful type for a variety of forms of research. In public 
health work it is notorious as the vector of urban yellow fever and is also the common 
vector of dengue. In both these latter capacities it has been and still is the object of control 
measures on an immense scale and has largely formed the basis for quarantine regulations 
in ports and in aeroplane traffic in many parts of the world. 
In the present volume the author has attempted to give a full and up-to-date account of 
what is known of this species. In chapter I is given an account of the history of research on 
mosquitoes with a section on that of early work on A. aegypti. In chapter II is discussed the 
systematics of the species including its known distribution and the influences responsible 
for this. Chapter III gives a general account of the life history of A. aegypti and of the 
natural enemies and parasites of mosquitoes. In chapter IV are described the relation of the 
species to disease transmission and the methods used in its control. A chapter is then 
devoted to technique, describing how the species can be reared and used in the laboratory 
with an account of useful apparatus to this end. There follows a chapter on the egg and its 
structure with changes following oviposition and one on the complicated issues connected 
with hatching, with a further chapter giving a full and detailed description of the embryo- 
logy of the mosquito. In succeeding chapters are described the different larval instars, the 
pupa and the imago with their physical characters, mechanisms, reactions and structure, 
including much new information such as data regarding weights and measurements of the 
different stages, critical studies of head sclerites and other systems. Here, for example,is 
given the first published description ever given of the mosquito brain. 
There are chapters on growth, on flight, on viability, on the action of insecticides and 
other subjects pertaining to mosquitoes and in the last chapter are brief accounts of recent 
work on such subjects as hormones, reserves and other physiological processes in 
mosquitoes. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Much of the author’s work here recorded was carried out in the Zoological Laboratories, 
Cambridge University, and I wish to acknowledge the library and other facilities so kindly 
xi 
PREFACE 
made available to me by Professor Sir James Gray, C.B.E., M.C., F.R.S. To Professor 
V. B. Wigglesworth, C.B.E., F.R.S., in whose Department I worked for some time, I am 
especially grateful for his kindness, warm interest and help so freely given and the unfailing 
helpfulness and courtesy of the laboratory staff. 
I am also greatly indebted to Professor D. Keilin, F.R.S., for use of the library and other 
facilities at the Molten0 Institute, Cambridge, and for his kindness and help in many ways. 
To Dr P. Tate of the Molten0 Institute I am indebted for going over the manuscript and 
for many suggestions and improvements. I have also to thank him for the interest he has 
taken in my work and kind help in many ways. 
To Mr P. F. Mattingly, whose help has been largely responsible for some of the sections, 
I am deeply indebted for the great trouble he has taken, not only in going over portions of 
the manuscript and making suggestions, but in advising me regarding recent advances in 
synonymy, systematics and genetics of A. aegypti, thus enabling sections in which these 
subjects are dealt with to be up-to-date. In this connection too I wish to thank Dr Harold 
Trapido of the Rockefeller Foundation for his interest, kind help and suggestions. 
I also wish to acknowledge help received from Dr A. N. Clements, of the Department of 
Zoology, Birkbeck College, London University, and from Professor Colvard Jones, of 
the University of Maryland, in drawing my attention to important publications I might 
otherwise not have seen. Also my thanks are due to those who have been kind enough to 
send me reprints or have kept me informed of their researches and whose names, which 
space prevents me giving here, will be found with their work in due context in the text. 
To Dr Ann Bishop of the Medical Research Council and Molten0 Institute, Professor 
R. M. Gordon of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, and Professor P. A. Buxton, 
F.R.S. and Dr H. S. Leeson of the London School of Tropical Medicine I am indebted for 
eggs of strains of A. aegypti on which the present studies have been based. 
To the Press I wish to express my thanks for the careful checking of the text and 
especially for the very expert and informed checking of the lists of references which this 
work has demanded. 
Lastly I wish to acknowledge the very helpful grant from the Royal Society towards the 
expenses of my work on A. aegypti and the very generous and greatly appreciated grant 
from the Rockefeller Foundation which has made it possible to publish this book. 
S.R.C. 
xii 
I 
HISTORICAL 
(a) THE NAME ‘MOSQUITO’ 
Mosquito is now the name in common use in English for biting flies of the family Culicidae, 
suborder Nematocera, order Diptera. Formerly the name for the mosquito in this country 
was ‘gnat’ (O.E. gnaet). The change took place about 1900, when as a result of Ross’s 
discovery of the mosquito cycle in malaria the importance of these insects to man became 
realised for the first time and knowledge concerning mosquitoes more generally diffused. 
Thus Kirby and Spence (1870) in their People’s Edition are not at all sure that the foreign 
‘ mosquito ’ is the same genus as our English Culex pipiens. Hurst (1890) uses for his paper 
the title The Life Development and History of a Gnat (Culex) and Giles (1900) entitles his 
book Handbook of Gnats or Mosquitoes. But Theobald (1901) and practically all English 
writers since use simply the name mosquito. It is well to remember therefore when looking 
up old literature that the reference in the index may be to gnats or Culex. If the name 
mosquito is used, it probably meant something believed to be fiercer than our English 
gnats, namely the mosquito of travellers’ tales. 
The French name is now ‘moustique’, according to the Oxford English Dictionary the 
metathetic equivalent of the Spanish ‘ mosquito ‘. But prior to about 1900, unless described 
as Culex or Culicidae, mosquitoes were almost invariably referred to by French writers as 
‘ Les cousins’ or sometimes ‘Les moucherons’. Another French name still given in some 
dictionaries is ‘maringouins ‘. In German the name ‘ Stechmiicken ’ is now in general use, 
the equivalent meaning to our mosquito. But formerly ‘Miicke’ or ‘Schnacke’ or some- 
times ‘ Gelse’ were not infrequently used. The Italian name ‘zanzare’ is still used in the 
literature, though Italian dictionaries mostly give ‘muskito ‘. Other names seen in the older 
literature and still to be found in dictionaries are: myg (Dano-Norwegian); mygga 
(Swedish) ; cinife, cenzalo, zancuda (Spanish) ; comaro, konops (Russian) ; konopus 
(Greek). The word ‘empis’ in Aristotle has usually been taken by translators as referring 
to the mosquito (translated as Miicke or gnat according to the language of the translation). 
It is interesting to trace the origin and history of this word mosquito and why it of all 
others should have come to be used. Clearly the word mosquito is of Spanish or Portuguese 
origin and it is probably correct to say that it must have come originally from Spanish or 
Portuguese America. It is perhaps more probable that its modern use has come from 
North America. We first find the name, often with variations in spelling, used in accounts 
of travellers. Such use dates back to the sixteenth century, for Phillips (1583) in Hakluyt’s 
Voyages (1589), p. 568, is quoted in the Oxford English Dictionary as saying ‘We were 
almost oftentimes annoyed with a kind of flie, the Spaniards call musketas’, and a number 
of other such early instances of the use of the word by travellers is given under the word 
mosquito in this dictionary. It is necessary, however, to be cautious in always ascribing . 
such references to mosquitoes as we now use the word. This is made very clear in Humboldt’s 
travels in Equinoxial America (Orinoco). Humboldt (1819) has much to say about 
I CH 
HISTORICAL 
mosquitoes, but he is referring to Simulidae, as he definitely says, and the word used by 
the natives for mosquitoes he states was ‘zancudos ’ and for a smaller kind ‘ tempraneros ‘. 
The word mosquito he gives as meaning ‘ little fly’ and ‘zancudos ’ as ‘long-legged’. The 
same confusion seems to extend to the use of the French ‘moustique’, for Humboldt says 
the French call Simulium moustiques and the zancudos ‘maringouins’. A curious example 
of this inversion of names will be found in a letter by Combes (1896). Seemingly this letter 
might be taken as describing mosquitoes attacking another species of fly as this emerged 
on the water surface from the pupa. But Combes takes care to say that the ‘moustique’ 
is not ‘le cousin’ of France and the larva is not aquatic, and that the name for ‘le cousin’ 
is ‘ maringouin ‘. So that it was not the mosquito which did the attacking but the Simulium. 
Indeed, one would scarcely expect the word mosquito to have any exact significance as a 
native word, for anyone familiar with the usual native’s reaction to requests for names of 
insects could well understand that this might be ‘a little fly’. 
The word mosquito was evidently used from very early times in North America and 
often in a context that does not obviously suggest direct origin from South America. Thus 
the Oxford English Dictionary quotes Whitbourne (1623) writing of Newfoundland as 
saying ‘There is a little nimble fly which is called musket0 ‘, and Wood (1634) referring to 
a pest in New England as ‘a musket0 which is not unlike our gnats in England’. Only in 
America in fact does general use of the word mosquito date back as far as the literature 
makes mention of these insects. Looking at a bibliography of the older literature on 
mosquitoes it is possible to tell at a glance, with occasional exceptions, whether the writer 
was English or American by the respective use of gnat or mosquito in the title. Woodward 
(1876) goes so far as to write ‘On the body scales of the English gnat and American 
mosquito. . . ‘. Manson, as did Ross, always spoke of the ‘mosquito’. Manson, however, 
had worked for many years in China. It is not impossible that the use of the word by these 
two authors and later by those carrying out investigations on yellow fever in tropical 
America played a decisive role in bringing about general adoption of the name mosquito 
in modern writings. 
We are on firmer ground in noting that the name Culex mosquito was given by Robineau- 
Desvoidy in 1827 to a mosquito from Cuba which he says ‘indigenes vacant mosquito, 
sicut mihi retulit dominus Poey’. This species is now the AFdes aegypti of present nomen- 
clature and Culex mosquito Desv. was the name by which it was known to Finlay and 
under which he considered on various grounds that it was the cause of yellow fever. Thus 
there is some excuse for regarding A?des aegypti, the mosquito to which this volume is 
dedicated, as to some extent responsible for the name mosquito being that which has come 
into general use.* 
What is the correct plural of mosquito ? The plural of the Spanish word would be 
‘ mosquitos’ and this form has been used by some English writers as being more correct 
than ‘ mosquitoes ‘. As a thoroughly anglicised word, however, it would seem that the 
latter form must be considered as sanctioned by general acceptance and usage along with 
‘potatoes’ (Spanish patata) and ‘tomatoes’ (Spanish tamata), these being along with 
‘mosquitoes ’ the plurals as given in English dictionaries. 
* Curiously enough 
’ regarding this author. the name ‘ Culex mosquito ’ occurs on p. 382 of Aldrovando (1602). See next section 
2 
EARLY WRITINGS 
(b) EARLY WRITINGS ON THE MOSQUITO 
Among the earliest references in the literature to the mosquito are certain passages in 
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) relating to empis, a name which as previously noted is generally 
accepted as signifying the mosquito. Thus in Aristotle’s Historia AnimaZium* it is stated 
that many animals live at first in water and afterwards change their form as is the case with 
empis (Book I, cap. I as given in parallel column with the Greek text in Aubert and Wimmer, 
p. 197, lines 8-12). In another passage (Peck, p. 47), this time in De Generatione Ani- 
malibus, empis is given as being among certain creatures which, coming from putrifying 
liquids, are neither produced out of other animals nor do they copulate, i.e. they were 
thought to arise by spontaneous generation of life, a belief in regard to the mosquito larva 
which still held some two thousand years later.? 
About 350 years after Aristotle are the writings of the Roman author C. Plinius Secundus 
(A.D. 23-79). In the thirty-seven books of his great natural history are some dozen or so 
references to ‘ culices ‘. One passage describes the gnat as an example of the wonderfulness 
of nature in providing on such a small scale the organs required for the five senses and 
other life requirements, and among other things comments on the fineness and perfection 
of the small and sharp sucking tube used to suck in and convey the blood. Other references 
are to swallows feeding on gnats: ‘that gnats love sour things, but to sweet things they do 
not come near. . . ; that gnats keep a foul stir in gardens with some small trees where water 
runneth through-but can be chased away by burning a little galbanum’. This reference 
to water is the nearest to any mention by the author that the insects have an aquatic 
stage. $ 
From A.D. 200 to A.D. 1200 has been described as the dark ages for biology, and following 
on Plinius Secundus it is not until the seventeenth century that naturalists again begin to 
write about the mosquito. Though from now till Ross’s discovery the mosquito was never 
considered of any importance it still had features which gave it a special interest to the 
early naturalists. These centred especially about the origin of the fly from the worm-like 
aquatic stage, its complicated organ of puncture, the proboscis, and a character for which 
the insect has always been notorious, its hum. It will be seen from what follows that each 
of these in its turn has been the subject of observation and comment. 
The earliest work dealing with the mosquito in what may perhaps be called medieval 
literature is Aldrovando (1602), a massive work entitled De Animalibus Znsectis a copy of 
which is in the University Library, Cambridge. Though the earliest work of any seen in 
this period, it more than any other of these early works approaches in arrangement a 
modern text-book of entomology. It deals with insects generally, but is divided into chapters 
one of which is headed ‘De Culicibus’. This again is subdivided into sections such as 
‘ Synonymia ‘, ‘ Locus ‘, ‘ Genus’, ‘Differentia descriptio’ and others. It is illustrated with 
text-figures consisting of coarsely executed but very life-like ‘sketches’ of insects, in one of 
* Those interested in Aristotle should consult Nordenskiold (1929) who gives a very good account of the works 
of this author. There are ten books of the Historia Animalium (three considered spurious); four of De Partibus 
AnimaZium; five of the De Generatione Animalibus; and three on the Psyche. Other accounts of Aristotle and other 
early naturalists are given by Miall (1912) and by Singer (1931). An English translation of the De Generatione 
Animalibus is given by Peck (1943). The standard German translation of the Historia Animalium is that of Aubert 
and Wimmer (1868). For details see references. 
t See references later to Bonanni, Joblot, Hooke and others. 
5 An English translation is The History of the World commonly called the Natural History of C. Plinius Secundus, 
Adam Islip, London, 1601. A copy is in the Balfour Library, Cambridge. 
3 I-2 
HISTORICAL 
which along with easily recognised figures of Panorpids, Ephemerids, etc. is the figure of 
a mosquito in flight given as Culex communis. There seem to be no figures depicting the 
larva such as are so characteristic of later publications. 
Another early work is Moufet, Insectorum sive minimorum animalium theatrum (1639, 
with a chapter of seven pages also headed ‘De Culicibus’. He collects references to 
mosquitoes made by various classical authors including Herodotus and Pausanias. 
Another author mentioned by Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) * giving classical references is 
Cowan (1865), who quotes from Ammianus Marcellinus a statement describing how swarms 
of mosquitoes in Mesopotamia by attacking the eyes of lions cause these to seek refuge 
in the rivers and to drown or become mad. 
So far such works as have been mentioned are mainly collections of statements about 
mosquitoes from classical and other authors. Of a different character are the text and 
plates of Hooke published in 1665. This author, writing at a time when the use of lenses 
was first revealing new and exciting fields of observation, sets out to describe and figure a 
great variety of objects as these were seen with the aid of magnifying glasses. Among 
such he describes and figures the CuZex larva, seemingly the first author to do so. He 
describes this as having jaws rather like a crustacean, which can be seen extracting invisible 
nourishment from the water. The plate of the larva shows this about a foot long, some- 
what crude but unmistakeable. The pupa is also depicted and the author observed the 
sequence of larva, pupa and imago. The adult figured, however, is Chironomus which is 
given as the brush-horned gnat. The copper plates were republished with fresh text anony- 
mously in 1745 under the title Micrographia restaurata.? 
Other early writers are Wagner (1684) ; P. Bonanni (1691) ; San Gallo (1712) and 
Reviglas (1737). The papers by Wagner, San Gallo and Reviglas are all in the same German 
journal which in the course of time has several times changed its name, though usually 
retaining the word curiosa. All the papers are short, a few pages only. Wagner, besides 
giving references to earlier classical authors, describes the stages of metamorphosis, though 
the eggs described are those of Chironomus. San Gallo describes the larva and figures 
the male and female adult. Reviglas deals with the structure of the proboscis as does 
Barth (1737). P. Bonanni figures the larva and pupa of Culex and discusses the 
question of spontaneous generation, a belief which died hard. Hooke also refers to 
spontaneous generation, but thinks it more likely that the mosquito drops its eggs 
upon the water. Another author named Bonanni (F. Bonanni, 1773) has also written on 
the mosquito and has described mosquito scales, but almost unrecognisable as such and 
very different to the clear drawing given by Hogg, referred to later as the first to 
describe these structures. Another early account is that by Godeheu de Riville (1760), 
who was the first to describe copulation in the mosquito, an observation that has 
a special interest in that from the author’s description the species was almost certainly 
AL;des aegypti. 
A more modern approach is seen in the work of the great naturalist Swammerdam. 
Even as early as 1669, in his Historia insectorum generalis, he figures the larva, pupa and 
adult. In his famous work Biblia naturae (1737) he deals systematically with the larva and 
nymph of various insects, showing that the parts of the imago are already present beneath 
* These authors give a very full account of the early history of mosquitoes in their first volume which is all the 
more valuable as they quote in extenso translations from many of the authors cited. 
t A copy of Hooke’s original work is in the library of the Royal Society and one of the Micrographia restaurata 
with the copper plates in the Balfour Library, Cambridge. 
4 
EARLY WRITINGS 
the skin and can be shown by dissection. * His description of the mosquito and its life 
history is remarkably like what might have been written as a short account at the present 
time. A footnote to the description of the larva is of special interest in relation to later 
work on insect physiology and is almost prophetic. In the English translation of the work 
this footnote reads as follows: 
There is not in all the insect world a creature more happily suited to show the several operations 
of life than this. A moderate microscope discovers to us very clearly what passes within the trans- 
parent body.-At this time [i.e., as he explains, when the larva is especially transparent at ecdysis] 
the beats of the heart and the motion of the stomach and intestines are perfectly seen and the two 
principal pulmonary tubes may be traced along their whole length. 
The most complete account among the early writers is, however, that by Reaumur 
(1738). Reaumur’s M&moire XIII. Histoire des cousins appeared to leave little to be further 
observed, and for many years remained unchallenged by any other work of a like nature 
dealing with the mosquito. 
(c) THE MOSQUITO AS A NATURAL HISTORY OBJECT 
During the period comprised in the latter half of the eighteenth and first half of the 
nineteenth century, roughly 1750-l 850, the mosquito was mostly written about as a natural 
history object, being dealt with sometimes in a few lines, sometimes more extensively, in 
the many natural histories that characterised this period in zoology. Its systematic posi- 
tion, its life history and stories as to its attacks upon travellers were given with monotonous 
sameness when its place in the Diptera called for its mention. Among accounts more 
especially deserving of notice is the section ‘Des Cousins ’ in the work of De Geer (1776) 
figuring the larva of a species of AL;des. Goldsmith (1779) gives a very original account 
(seven pages) including reference to mosquitoes retiring into caves and with the curious 
statement that they are capable of parthenogenetic development. In a supplement to 
Rosel’s Insecten Belustigungen are additions to Reaumur’s work with plates by Kleeman 
(1792). In the first two editions of Cuvier’s great natural history, Le r2gne animal (18 17, 
1829) are some few pages by Latreille. In the third edition of 1849 (the so-called Apostle’s 
Edition) is a section containing some observations on the structure of the proboscis 
by E. Blanchard. A quite interesting account of the ‘gnat ’ is given in an addendum by 
Griffith and Pidgeon in the English edition of the same work, 1832. 
Many other short accounts of gnats, culices, cousins or other names occur during this 
period in the literature,? many of them little more than a page or two in encyclopaedias or 
natural histories. The larva is now frequently referred to, often as a grub or worm-like 
creature, for example, ‘Der Schnackenwurm’ (Ledermuller, 1761), ‘Wurm von der 
Singschnacke’ (Slabber, 1781), ‘Ver du cousin’ (Joblot, 1754). Joblot figures the Culex 
larva in several stages of growth, saying that he only recognised that they were the aquatic 
stage of ‘le cousin’ when he had hatched out ‘moucherons’. Joblot in the same paper was 
* Swammerdam uses the term nymph for the pre-imaginal stage of insects as do many other early authors. The 
term pupa now used for this stage in holometabolous insects was given by Linnaeus to the chrysalis of Lepidoptera 
from its resemblance to a baby that is swathed or bound up as is customary with many peoples (pupa = Latin for 
a girl or doll). (Cornstock, 1920, p. 186.) 
7 See: Geoffrey (1764), Olivier (1791), Jordens (1801), Latreille (1805-25), GuCrin (1835), Packard (1869), 
Pagenstecher (1874). 
5 
HISTORICAL 
the first to describe the larva of Anopheles with a large and excellent figure such as might 
have been a recent representation, of this now much studied form. According to Bur- 
meister (1832) the larva of Anopheles was first described by Goeze (1775) and later by 
Lichtenstein (1800), but was only identified as the larva of Anopheles by Fischer (1812). 
There can be no doubt, however, but that Joblot, as given above, figured the Anopheles 
larva as early as 1754. Apart from his figure, he states that the head of the new creature 
was ‘ tres mobile, tournant a droite & a gauche comme sur un pivot ‘. It was over 100 years 
later that Jourdain (1893) described as the larva of a culicine of which he had not deter- 
mined the genus or species a creature with such a singular movement of rotation of the 
head. Furthermore, according to Howard (1900), what Fischer described as the larva and 
pupa of Culex claviger Fabr. were those of a species of Corethra. Dobell in his life of 
Leeuwenhoek states that Leeuwenhoek in a letter dated 1700, besides giving a description 
of the gnat larva, distinguished the attitude of the larva of Anopheles from that of Culex, 
but no details are given by the biographer. Brauer (1883) is stated by Nuttall and Shipley 
(1901), p. 48, to have mistaken the larva of Anopheles for that of Dixa. Brauer gives an 
excellent line drawing of an Anopheles larva showing the palmate hairs. He gives it, how- 
ever, as the larva of Dixa sp. (Culex nemorosus Heeg). The genus Anopheles was erected 
by Meigen, 1818, and the larvae of the two forms clearly described by Mienert, 1886. 
Characteristic of the period 1850-1900 are accounts of mosquitoes as encountered in 
northern latitudes and in the tropics by travellers. Many of the references to polar regions 
really say very little except that mosquitoes were found extremely tormenting. Regarding 
the tropics one of the most important travellers’ descriptions are passages in Humboldt 
when describing experiences in the Orinoco. The passages are given in extenso by Howard, 
Dyar and Knab (19 12). Another feature of the literature are references to ’ swarms ’ of 
mosquitoes. Those interested will find many accounts of such in the various editions of 
Kirby and Spence, especially the People’s Edition (1870). 
Whilst the above gives an outline of the general trend in the literature on mosquitoes 
prior to what may be called the modern period, such an account would be incomplete if 
it failed to take note of letters and brief communications to journals more especially from 
1850 to 1900, such as Nature, Science Gossip, Entomologist’s Monthly Magazine, and 
especially Insect Life. At first sight these brief and often ephemeral communications may 
seem of little value. Historically, however, they cannot be neglecte’d, for though a consider- 
able proportion relate to seemingly rather trivial matters, some give the first indication of 
observations or ideas which have later become important. Among such may be mentioned 
references by Howard to the first use of oil against larvae, the first use of larvivorous fish, 
the first reference to natural enemies of mosquitoes and early observations on remedies and 
preventives against mosquito bites. 
These communications further show very strikingly how complete has been the change 
in character of the literature on mosquitoes from the year 1900 or so onwards. This is very 
notably so in relation to the subject of our present study, the now notorious vector of yellow 
fever. For, apart from various names given by systematists, often without any significance 
attaching to the mosquito they were naming, almost the only author attaching special 
importance to this species was Finlay, who as early as 1881 had associated it and another 
mosquito with the transmission of yellow fever and had made observations on its habits. , 
The larva does not seem ever to have been described or figured until it was depicted by 
James in 1899 as the larva of the ‘tiger’ mosquito. From 1900 onwards, however, whilst 
6 
NATURAL HISTORY 
Anopheles became widely known as ‘ the malarial mosquito’ and has become the subject of 
an enormous literature, Stegomyia fasciata from about the same time became ‘the yellow 
fever mosquito’ and under this name and that of A&lees aegypti has since acquired a 
literature almost as great. 
(d) EARLY OBSERVATIONS ON STRUCTURE 
Reference has already been made to the fact that one of the features relating to the mosquito 
that had a special interest for the early naturalists was the structure of the proboscis, and 
in the early literature are many references to the number and nature of its components. 
Most of these observations are now purely of historical interest, being made under 
conditions very different to those of the present day with the modern miscroscope.” 
Swammerdam (1737-8) describes without naming five stylets plus the sheath. All the 
stylets are shown ending similarly with fusiform swollen ends devoid of any further detail. 
Authors up to a century or more later gave little more detail than this and in the naming 
of the parts were not always correct. Thus Blanchard (1849) in his figure of the mouth- 
parts of Culex pipiens shows labrum (upper lip), labium (lower lip), maxillae (labelled as 
mandibles) and a central bifid structure labelled machoires (maxillae). Gerstfeldt (1853) 
describes a sheath formed of the lower lip only, containing six setae, but like many other 
writers also gives the maxillae as mandibles. Many other authors have referred to or given 
some description of the mouth-parts, including Becher (1882) who summarises work to 
that date in this respect. For all practical purposes, however, the first describer of the 
mouth-parts in any adequate modern sense was Dimmock (188 1) in his classical treatise 
on the mouth-parts of some Diptera, and later in his paper in Psyche on the mouth-parts 
and suctorial apparatus of Culex. After surveying work already done in some detail this 
author goes on to describe fully and accurately all the parts and gives a plate showing 
sections through the proboscis at different levels. He describes also the mouth-parts in 
the male (1884). The parts were briefly described in the same year by Meinert and more 
fully later by Macloskie (1887,1888). There are also contributions by Muir (1883) ; Murphy 
(1883) ; Smith (1890, 1896) ; and Kellog (1899) ; the last mentioned two authors tracing the 
parts through their development from the larva. The complete working out of the problems 
connected with the minute structure and functioning of the parts was not, however, 
achieved until much later as described in a subsequent chapter. 
Beyond drawings of the egg-raft of Culex pipiens by Reaumur and others little is to be 
found in the literature as to any details of egg structure until Howard (1900) and Theobald 
(1901) figure the eggs of one or two species of Culicines, and Grassi, Nuttall and Shipley 
and others give descriptions of the eggs of Anopheles. That the eggs of Stegomyia fasciata 
were laid singly on the water was noted by Finlay in 1886, by Daniels and by Ross (both 
in Theobald, 1901), the figure of the egg by Daniels being one of the first, if not the first, 
to be published. It shows the chorionic bodies on the outline of the egg, but incorrectly as 
air chambers as many at first thought them to be. 
In spite of many representations of the larva in the early literature accurate and detailed 
figures are not given until relatively late. The siphon appears to have been first described 
in detail by Haller (1878). In 1886 came the classic by Meinert on the eucephalous larvae 
of Diptera giving descriptions of mosquito larval structure. A paper in quite modern style 
* See: Barth (1737), Sulzer (1761), Roffredi (1766-g), Savigny (1816), Durkee (1855). 
7 
HISTORICAL 
is that by Raschke (1887) in which he describes the mouth-parts and other structural 
features of the larva of Culex (now AL;des) nemoralis. The plate accompanying the paper is 
noticeable for the delineation given of the sclerites at the base of the flabella or feeding 
brushes. At the end of his paper he gives a list of some sixteen references to earlier writers 
on larval structure. Other authors giving early descriptions of larval characters or 
structure are: Lacordaire (1838), one of the very early writers on structure of the mosquito 
and one who has even described the micropilar apparatus on the egg of Culex; Pouchet 
(1847); Kraepelin (1882); Brauer (1883); Wielowiejski (1886); Miall (1895); Howard 
(1900). Pouchet describes the eight vesicular stomachs (caeca) of the larva. Wielowiejski 
describes the pericardial cells, oenocytes and fat body. Howard’s figures of the larval 
parts were widely copied and like his figures of the adult will be found repeated in many 
authors’ works. Nuttall and Shipley’s study of the Anopheles larva, as also Grassi’s work, 
more correctly fall in the modern period and will be referred to later. 
An outstanding contribution which will be extensively referred to later is that of Hurst 
(1890) on the structure of the larva and pupa of CuZex and the anatomical changes con- 
nected with pupal ecdysis and emergence. 
Of works relating to the structure of the adult may be mentioned Dufour (1851) on the 
structure of the digestive tract and generative organs of CuZex (now Theobaldia) annulata; 
Schindler (1878) who first described the mid-gut and Malpighian tubules ; Lecaillon (1899) 
on the filamentous processes in the latter structures and, 1900, on structure of the ovary; 
and later others whose work will be noted when dealing with the adult structure. Of papers 
of outstanding character are those by Johnston (1855) and Child (1894) describing the 
organ at the base of the antenna now known as Johnston’s organ, and that by A. M. Mayer 
(1874) showing that the hairs of the male antenna responded to particular notes and that 
the antennae acted as sensory organs enabling the male to locate the female. An author, 
P. Mayer (1879), has also written on certain antenna1 sense organs in Diptera in Italian, 
but I have so far been unable to see this work. Mention should also be made of Kowalevsky 
(1889) who described the pericardial cells, and Hogg (1854, 1871) who described the scales 
of mosquitoes, followed by Anthony (1871), Newman (1872) and Woodward (1876). In 
1899 Ficalbi had given an account of the external structure describing many of the characters 
used later by systematists, such as those of the palpi, tarsal claws, wing venation and even 
some indication of genitalic characters. With the discovery of the part played by the 
mosquito as intermediary host in the life history of the malaria parasite the internal 
structure of the mosquito assumed an enhanced importance and, at the close of the period 
we have taken as covering early research, was dealt with for the first time systematically in 
accounts by Grandpre and Charmoy (1900) ; Grassi (1900) ; Christophers (190 1) ; and very 
fully by Nuttall and Shipley (1901). 
(e) EARLY SYSTEMATIC WORK ON MOSQUITOES 
The main objectives of systematists may be given as : (1) the correct naming of species in 
accordance with the rules of zoological nomenclature; (2) their identification; and (3) their 
natural classification. The naming of mosquitoes on the binomial system, as does that for 
all forms of animal life, dates from 1758, the year of publication of the 10th edition of 
Linnaeus’s Systema Naturae. It may be worth while mentioning in this respect that a photo- 
8 
SYSTEMATIC WORK 
stat facsimile of the relevant first volume of this work has been published by the British 
Museum (Brit. Mus. Publ., 1939), a form in which this famous work may be studied for all 
practical purposes in the original. Some mosquitoes it is true had been given names before 
this crucial date, and some of these look very like names on the binomial system, though 
these must be considered as descriptive names only and invalid. This point has some 
interest in connection with the synonymy of our species, because in the first edition of 
Hasselquist A&!es aegypti had already been described as ‘Culex (aegypti) articulationibus 
candidis etc.‘. But it is only in the second edition (Reise nach Palestina, 1762) edited in 
respect to nomenclature by Linnaeus that the name given as Culex aegypti is valid in form 
and date. * In 1805 Fabricius in his revision of the Diptera, classified on the basis of their 
mouth-parts, gives a list of described species of mosquitoes. They number fifteen, including 
one or two that were possibly not mosquitoes. In 18 18 Meigen described thirteen more 
species and erected two further genera in addition to the original genus Culex of Linnaeus, 
namely Anopheles and AEdes, the latter for the European species Ai;des cinereus which 
remained almost the only species in the genus for many years until, following Dyar and 
Knab (1906), Dyar (1922) and Edwards (1932), the genus AC;des was expanded to cover as 
subgenera a large number of previously erected genera, so that it now includes probably 
a quarter or more of the known species of mosquito. By 1889 about fifty-six species of 
mosquito had been described from Europe, North Africa and Egypt. 
In the same period a number of species had been added to the list by Wiedemann (1821) 
from the East; Robineau-Desvoidy (1827) from South and Central America; Walker 
(1848-65) f rom material received at the British Museum from various countries; Skuse 
(1889) from Australia; Arribalzaga (1891) from South America; which with a certain 
number described by Loew, Van der Wulp, Macquart, Doleschall, Coquillett and others 
brought the total number of valid species as given by Theobald prior to publication of his 
first two volumes (1901) to about 164, that is, something like a tenth of the number now 
known. To these may be added about eighty-two names placed by Theobald as synonyms, 
thus giving a total of about 250 namings prior to 1901, though this number might have to 
be added to somewhat on a close study of the literature. 
This summary, however, gives no hint of the confusion and lack of co-ordination re- 
garding the tropical species. The reasons for this are not far to seek. Almost the only 
systematic work devoted wholly to mosquitoes prior to Theobald was a small volume of 
reprinted papers by Ficalbi (1899) giving a revision of the European forms. The descrip- 
tions given by dipterologists were commonly quite inadequate. Those given by Walker for 
the considerable number of species he described averaged four to seven lines. Synoptic 
tables such as are now in such extensive use scarcely existed, and had such existed they 
would have been useless, for they could have included but a small fraction of the species 
actually existing. It is not surprising therefore that AFdes aegypti as a world species 
escaped recognition. It had been described often enough, but the trouble was that it had 
so many aliases, almost one for every country and systematist, that as a species it is no 
exaggeration to say that up to 1900 it was still virtually unknown. 
On the discovery of the mosquito cycle of malaria by Ross and the work of Grassi and 
other Italian workers, followed within a year or so by the proof by Reed and his co-workers 
that Ak;des aegypti was the agent in transmission of yellow fever, interest in mosquitoes 
became general. Collections began to pour in from different tropical countries. Medical 
* See, however, remarks later under synonymy of this species. 
9 
HISTORICAL 
men and others interested in the new developments not only collected but intensively 
studied the many species in their natural surroundings. For the first time careful detailed 
descriptions were given and structural characters studied and made use of in identification 
and classification. 
The first to attempt to correlate the mass of published descriptions in a treatise on world 
species was Giles, who in 1900 published his Handbook of the Gnats or Mosquitoes and him- 
self added some seventeen new species mostly from India. There can be no doubt, how- 
ever, that it was Theobald who, in his gigantic task of grappling with the Culicidae of the 
world, in the five volumes of his monograph published over the years 190 l-l 0 opened up the 
study of mosquitoes to workers all over the world. We have already noted that in his first 
two volumes this author records 164 previously described valid species with eighty-two 
synonyms. To these were added in his first two volumes 132 new species under his own 
name, which with twenty-eight described by Giles and some other contemporary authors 
brought the total of species described in the two years 1900 and 1901 to about as many as 
had been described in the previous century and a half. The total of known species at this 
time was about 320 or with synonyms 400 namings. 
Though we are here not so much concerned with systematics as such it is perhaps of 
interest to note that the final number of species as given by Smart (1940) for Theobald’s 
revision (19 10) was 1050, and that in Edwards’s Genera Insectorum (1932) 1400. Probably 
the number at the present time is about 2000. This great increase in the number of known 
species is especially noticeable in the case of certain countries. The number of species 
described from Africa and its islands prior to 1900 was five. In 1941 the number listed in 
Edwards’s monograph of Ethiopian mosquitoes was 405 (Anopheles, 86; Acdes, 132; 
Culex, 99; other genera, 88). The number known from India before 1900 (that is before 
Giles’s 1st edition) seems to have been about three. In Barraud’s revision (1934) it was 
245 (sixty-eight being new species under that author’s name). 
Besides this increase in the number of described species much more attention has been 
given to classification. To some seven genera described prior to 1900, mostly relating to 
outstandingly distinct forms (Megarhinus, Sabethes and Psorophora by Robineau-Desvoidy ; 
Janthinsoma, Taeniorhynchus and Uranotaenia by Arribalzaga; Haemagogus by Williston), 
Theobald in his first two volumes added some ten further genera (subject, however, to 
considerable modification later), among which occurs for the first time the now familiar 
name Stegomyia, a name which though later subordinated to the rank of a subgenus is 
still valid. 
It was as the type species of this genus and as Stegomyia fasciata Fabr. that A?des 
aegypti was first introduced to the world by Theobald in its proper perspective, a name by 
which it was familiarly known until those changes in nomenclature took place which are 
discussed in the section on synonymy and which after many vicissitudes finally by general 
agreement ended in the present designation of Aedes aegypti. 
(J’) RESEARCH ON Al?DES AEGYPTI AND 
ITS ROLE IN DISEASE 
As already noted there is a large literature relating to AZdes aegypti, its systematics, its 
distribution, its breeding places, its bionomics, its relation to disease, its control, its use in 
the laboratory as a test animal and much else. All these subjects will be dealt with in 
RESEARCH AND DISEASE RELATIONSHIP 
detail later in this volume. We may, however, here follow briefly the general course of 
research on the species, thus completing our historical survey. 
There can be no doubt but that it was the discovery that they were vectors of disease that 
stimulated and was responsible for the immense amount of research on mosquitoes that 
dates from the opening of what has been referred to as the modern period of research on 
these insects. And whilst this applies pre-eminently to the subfamily Anophelini owing to 
their role as vectors of malaria, it no less applies to the Culicini and especially to the genera 
Culex and ASZes, both of which include important vectors of disease in man and animals. 
Moreover, this applies especially to the single species A. aegypti, for it is almost world-wide 
within the tropical and subtropical zones, and of the four important human diseases trans- 
mitted by mosquitoes, namely malaria, yellow fever, dengue and filariasis, A. aegypti is the 
usual vector species for two, and has been the subject of considerable research before it 
could be known that it did not play an important role as vector of a third, filariasis. Further, 
its reputation as the yellow fever mosquito has given it an importance to the sanitarian, 
especially in the New World, possessed by scarcely any other single species of mosquito. 
Knowledge that insects and other arthropods were concerned in the spread of diseases 
came relatively late. Translated extracts are given by Agramonte (1908) from an article by 
Beauperthuy (1854) in which this author points to the mosquito ‘hypothetically con- 
sidered’ as the agent responsible for yellow fever. Beauperthuy in this and some other 
writings held that yellow fever (and the intermittents, etc.) were the result of the direct 
injection of a poison by mosquitoes much on the analogy of snake-bite, though he did not 
regard this poison as due to the mosquito itself but as a virus derived from swamps. 
However mistaken he may have been he was correct in the deduction that mosquitoes were 
responsible for yellow fever, and presumably his theory applied also to malaria. In regard 
to the former disease it is interesting that he specifically mentions what is evidently 
A. aegypti, namely as the ‘zancudo bobo’ with legs striped with white which he says may 
be regarded as more or less the house-haunting kind, one of the earliest references to this 
species in the tropics. Possibly other hypothetical deductions regarding mosquitoes as 
conveyers of disease exist even before this. But when King in two rather remarkable 
papers (1882,1883) had given reasons for regarding mosquitoes as responsible for malaria, 
he did not suppose that these were agents in man-to-man infection, as is now understood, 
but as conveying disease from some outside source. Even as late as the early days following 
the discovery of the mosquito malaria cycle the true appreciation of the essentially in- 
fectious nature of malarial infection was still a new idea. 
The first concrete evidence that mosquitoes were concerned in the transmission of 
disease was the discovery by Manson in 1878” in China, confirmed in the same year by 
Lewis in India (who first discovered Filaria in the blood), that the Filaria sanguinis hominis 
underwent development in a brown mosquito which laid its eggs in masses (Culex fatigans). 
Manson observed the early developmental changes of Filaria with casting of the sheath, 
the change to inert sausage-like bodies and a later and larger active form one-fifteenth of 
an inch in length. By 1884 Manson, and later (1899) Bancroft, had followed development 
to all but the last eventual location of the fully developed embryo in the proboscis, a dis- 
* Or more correctly 1877, since Paul Russell in his recent book Man’s Mastery of Malaria gives Manson’s 
discovery of development of Filaria in the mosquito as having been first published in the China Customs Medical 
Reports (1877). Manson’s paper given in the list of references as published in 1879 in the Journal of the Linnean 
Society was read in March 1878 and reviewed in the Medical Times and Gazette and in Nature in the same year. 
II 
HISTORICAL 
covery later made independently by Low (1900) in Culex in England from material sent 
by Bancroft from Australia, and by James in the same year in India in both Culex and 
Anopheles. In 1893 Smith and Kilbourne discovered the hereditary transmission of piro- 
plasmosis of cattle (Texas fever) by the tick. In 1895 the trypanosome of nagana, the 
tsetse-fly disease, was discovered by Bruce. The discovery of the mosquito cycle of malaria, 
which revolutionised the outlook on mosquitoes and other biting insects and practically 
founded modern tropical medicine, was made by Ross in 1898. * The discovery by Reed 
and his collaborators that yellow fever was transmitted by Ai;des aegypti followed in 1901. 
For a summary of what was known of insect transmission of disease at this time with 
bibliography see Nuttall’s classical paper ‘On the role of insects, arachnids and myriapods 
as carriers in the spread of bacterial and parasitic diseases of man and animals ‘. See also 
Stiles who gives a list of workers. A useful bibliography is given by Doane in his book 
Insects and Disease (1910). See also Mackerras (1948). For another recent account see 
Brumpt, ‘ P&is de parasitologie’. 
Though the discovery that A. aegypti conveyed yellow fever by its bite after an interval 
was solely the work of Reed, Carroll, Agramonte and Lazear, who first conveyed the 
disease to volunteers by the bite of A. aegypti previously fed on cases of the disease, it is 
impossible to overlook the work of Finlay, who from 188 1 onwards was led to investigate 
the habits and bionomics of the species through his belief that it was this mosquito which 
conveyed yellow fever by its bite and that many facts in the epidemiology of the disease were 
to be explained in relation to its life history. He says (1886) that two species of mosquito 
were common in Havana, Culex cubensis La Sagra, laying boat-shaped egg-rafts, and 
C. mosquito Rob.-Desv., laying its eggs singly. He says that he was told that the latter 
species had lately been described as C. fasciatus. He describes the chief structures of the 
proboscis, the bending back of the sheath (labium) when biting, the usual distance of 
penetration, the time taken for engorgement, the effect of temperature on the mosquito’s 
activity and other features of its life history, seemingly the first systematic observations 
ever made on the bionomics of any tropical species of mosquito. Following on the work 
of the American Commission in Havana was that of the observers in the French Commis- 
sion, Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond, and somewhat later of the German observers 
Otto and Neumann working in Brazil. Much of the main facts as we now know them 
regarding transmission of the disease was established at this time, further advances being 
chiefly in the direction of increased knowledge of the properties of the virus and the findings 
in respect to transmission by other species than Aedes aegypti in jungle yellow fever. 
That dengue was conveyed by A. aegypti has followed as the result of many observations 
in different parts of the world, but especially in Australia where Bancroft in 1906 gave 
strong reasons for regarding A. aegypti as the vector and had infected two volunteers, 
though in an area where infection might have been otherwise contracted. Complete proof 
was given in the 19 16 epidemic in Australia by Clelland, Bradley and McDonald, who 
infected volunteers in a dengue-free area by the bites of mosquitoes fed on dengue cases 
elsewhere. 
In regard to filariasis the onus of proof has lain rather with showing that A. aegypti is 
not an efficient vector of human filariasis, which is mainly conveyed by Culex fatigans. 
* Ross published the complete cycle in bird malaria in November 1898, having previously seen pigmented 
oocysts in human malaria in Anopheles in August 1897. A very full and interesting account of this great discovery 
is given by Russell (1955). 
12 
RESEARCH AND DISEASE RELATIONSHIP 
It has, however, been found to be the usual vector of DiroJZaria immitis of the dog. For 
further information regarding diseases transmitted by Ai;des aegypti see the chapter on 
relation to disease. 
With the knowledge that mosquitoes were important vectors of disease there came a 
greatly increased interest in methods by which they might be prevented from breeding or 
destroyed and in means of protection from their bites. Reference to a writer (Delboeuf) 
who in 1847 speaks of destroying mosquitoes by pouring oil on water where they breed is 
made by Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12). The same suggestion is made by Southey (18 12). 
The first recorded experiments, however, in this direction appear to have been those by 
Howard (1893-4) who observed the effect of such treatment upon a small selected pond. 
Oil was for many years the chief method used in the treatment of breeding places, but has 
now been largely replaced by more effective larvicides. It was not long after the discovery 
of the role of A. aegypti in the transmission of yellow fever before control measures were 
undertaken on a large scale in seaports and towns in the yellow fever zone of America and 
later elsewhere. Still more recently measures directed especially against the adult mosquito 
have been greatly developed in connection with aeroplane traffic. These measures have 
involved organisation and legislation, as also research into the methods of using sprays, 
lethal gases, aerosols, the effectiveness of different larvicides, use of larvivorous fish and 
increasingly effective insecticides used against the adult mosquito; also, too, research into 
methods of personal and communal protection. 
Whilst. the part played by mosquitoes in disease transmission has been a major reason 
for such research on methods of control, it has also emphasised the importance of systematic 
and bionomical research, observations on geographical distribution and much else. 
Reference to the many observers who have contributed in this respect to knowledge of 
A. aegypti, its life history, systematics, behaviour, structure and physiology, will be found in 
later chapters of this work. 
A. aegypti too has been extensively used as a test animal for research in many fields. It 
has been used on a large scale in testing insecticides and repellents, in trying out essential 
food requirements, in work on genetics and in other studies. For such laboratory work 
A. aegypti has many outstanding advantages; its hardihood, its readiness to feed and the 
ease with which it can be reared, with the great advantage that eggs can be stored for 
months if necessary without losing vitality, make it almost uniquely useful for such a 
purpose. 
REFERENCES 
(a) THE NAME MOSQUITO 
ALDROVANDO, U. (1602). See under (II). 
ARISTOTLE. See under (b). 
COMBES, P. (1896). Les rnoustiques de l’ile d’Anticosta. Rev. sci., Paris (4), 6, 751-3. 
GILES, G. M. (1900). See under (e). 
HUMBOLDT, A. VON (1819). Relation historique. Voyage aux regions e’quinoxiales du Nouveau 
Continent, fait en 1799, etc. Paris. Vol. II, pp. 333-49. See also below, under MACGILLIVRAY. 
HURST, C. M. (1890). See under (d). 
KIRBY, W. and SPENCE, W. (1815-70). See under (c). 
I3 
HISTORICAL 
MACGILLIVRAY, W. (1832). The Travels and Researches of Alex. von Humboldt. Oliver and Boyd, 
Edinburgh, and Simpson and Marshall, London, pp. 247-9. 
(The) Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford Univ. Press. 
ROBINEAU-DESVOIDY, J. B. (1827). See under (e). 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901-10). See under (e). 
WOODWARD, J. J. (1876). See under (d). 
(b) EARLY WRITINGS ON THE MOSQUITO 
ALDROVANDO, U. (1602). De animalibus insectis Zibri septem. Bononiae. Chapter v, pp. 382-402. 
(Copy in Univ. Library, Cambridge.) 
ARISTOTLE. See AUBERT, H. and WIMMER, F. (1868); Peck, A. L. (1943). 
AUBERT, H. and WIMMER, F. (1868). Aristoteles Thierkunde. W. Engelmann, Leipzig, p. 197, 
lines 8-12. (Greek text with German transl.) 
BARTH, J. M. (1737). Dissertatio de culice. Ratisbonae. 
BONANNI (or BUONANI), F. (1773). Rerum naturalium historia nempe quadrupedum insectorum etc. 
Tempelliano, Rome. Vol. I, XI Culex, pp. 45-51. 
BONANNI, P. (1691). Micrographia curiosa. Rome. Part II, p. 370. 
COMSTOCK, J. H. (1920). An Introduction to Entomology. Ed. 2. Comstock Publ. Co. Ithaca, 
New York. 
COWAN, F. (1865). Curious Facts in the History of Insects, etc. Philadelphia. 
GODEHEU DE RIVILLE (1760). Mkmoire sur l’accouplement des cousins. Mein. Acad. Sci., Paris, 
3, 617-22. 
HOGG, J. (1854). See under (d). 
HOOKE, R. (1665). Micrographia, or some Physiological Descriptions of Minute Bodies made by 
Magnifying Glasses, etc. London. Folio, pp. 185-95 with plates 27 and 28. The plates 
republished with anonymous text in 1745 as Micrographia restaurata. John Bowles, 
London. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912). The Mosquitoes of North and Central America 
and the West Indies. Carnegie Institute, Washington. Vol. I. A very full historical account 
with bibliography. 
JOBLOT, L. (1754). See under (c). 
MIALL, L. C. (1912). The Early Naturalists (1500-1789). Macmillan and Co. London. 
MOUFET (or MOFFET), T. (1634). Insectorum sive minimorum animalium theatrum. London. 
(Copy in Brit. Mus. Nat. Hist. Library.) 
NORDENSKIOLD, E. (1929). The History of Biology. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co., London. 
PECK, A. L. (1943). Aristotle’s Generation of Animals. Heinemann Ltd. and Harvard Univ. 
Press, p. 47. 
PLINIUS SECUNDUS, C. (1525). Naturalis historiae. Joannes Camerton Minoritanum. Also 
English transl. by P. Holland (1601), The History of the World, commonly called the Natural 
History of C. Plinius Secundus. Adam Islip, London. (Copy in the Balfour Library, 
Cambridge .) 
REAUMUR, R. A. F. DE (1738). M einoires pour servir 2 l’histoire des insectes. Meinoire XIII. 
Histoire des cousins. Vol. IV, pp. 573-636. 
REVIGLAS, D. (1737). Observatio de culicum generatione. Acta Acad. Nat. Curiosa, 4, 14-20. 
(Copy in Royal Society Library, London.) 
SAN GALLO, P. DE (1712). Esperienze intorno alle generatione delle zanzare. Ephem. Acad. Natur. 
Curiosa, Cent. 2, pp. 220-32. (Copy in Royal Society Library, London.) 
SINGER, C. (1931). A Short History of Biology. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
SWAMMERDAM, J. (1669). Historia insectorum generalis. Utrecht. With later editions 1682 and 
1692. Also published at Batavia 1685, with a later edition 1733. 
SWAMMERDAM, J. (1737-8). Biblia naturae; sive historia insectorum, etc. Leyden. Two volumes 
with Latin and Dutch in columns; contains ‘ historia culicis ‘. Vol. I, pp. 348-62 with 
plates 31 and 32. An edition published in 1752 at Leipzig contains a section ‘ Die Mucke ‘, 
pp. 144-8. 
I4 
REFERENCES 
SWAMMERDAM, J. (1758). Swammerdam’s Book of Nature or the History of Insects. English transl. 
by Floyd and Hill. Seffert, London. Contains section on ‘Culex or gnat’. Vol. I, pp. 153-9. 
(Copy in Balfour Library, Cambridge.) 
WAGNER, J. J. (1684). De generatione culicum. Misc. Curiosa sive Ephem. Phys. etc. Frankfurt 
and Leipzig. Dec. II, Anno 3, pp. 368-70. (Copy in Royal Society Library, London.) 
(C) THE MOSQUITO AS A NATURAL HISTORY OBJECT 
BLANCHARD, E. (1849). ‘ Cousin’ in Cuvier, Le rPgne animal. Ed. 3, part VI. Insectes. Vol. II, 
pp. 306-10 and plate 161. 
BRAUER, F. (1883). Systematische Studien auf Grundlage der Dipteren-larven, etc. Denkschr. 
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 47, l-99. 
BURMEISTER, H. (1832). Handbuch der Entomologie. G. Reimer, Berlin. Vol. I, p. 182. 
CUVIER, BARON G. (1817). Le rigne animal. Ed. 2, 1829; Ed. 3, 1836-49. Includes sections by 
Latreille. See also E. BLANCHARD (1849). 
CUVIER, BARON G. (1832). The Animal Kingdom (English ed.). Whittaker, Treacher and Co. 
London. Vol. xv. Insecta. Has additions by Griffith and Pidgeon including ‘ Culices ‘, 
pp. 726-37. 
DE GEER, C. (1776). Me’moires pour servir ci Z’histoire des insectes. P. Hesselberg, Stockholm. 
Vol. VI, pp. 298-324. 
DOBELL, C. (1932). Antony von Leeuwenhoek and his Little Animals. Staple Press, London. 
FINLAY, C. J. (1881-1904). See under (f). 
FISCHER, G. (1812). Observations sur quelque Dip&a de la Russie. Notice sur la larve de CuZex 
claviger de Fabricius. M&m. Sot. Imp. Nat., Moscow, 4, 167-80, figs. 1-16. 
GEOFFREY, E. F. (1764). ‘Le cousin commun’ in Histoire abrtige’e des insectes, 2, 573-80. 
GOEZE (1775). Besch. berZiner Gesch. Naturf. Freunde, 1, 359, pl. 8. 
GOLDSMITH, 0. (1779). An History of the Earth and Animated Nature. J. Nourse, London. 
Vol. VIII, pp. 151-9. 
GRIFFITH and PIDGEON. See under CUVIER (1832). 
GUBRIN, F. E. (1835). Dictionnaire pittoresque d’histoire naturelle et des ph&omPnes de la nature, 
2, 358-60 with plate 127. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1900-17). See under (d). 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (19 12). Vol. I. See under (b). 
JAMES, S. P. (1899). Collection of mosquitoes and their larvae. Indian Med. Gaz. 34, 431-4. 
JOBLOT, L. (1754). Observations d’histoire naturelles faites avec Ze microscope sur un grand nombre 
d’insectes. Vol. I, pp. 121-4. (Copy in the Univ. Library, Cambridge.) 
JORDENS, J. H. (1801). Entomologie und helminthologie des menschlichen Kiirpers. G. A. Grau. 
Vol. I, pp. 160-74. (Figures micropile of CuZex egg.) 
JOURDAIN, J. H. (1893). Note sur un mouvement de rotation singulier de la tete chez une larve de 
culicide. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, n.s. 5, 249-50. 
KIRBY, W. and SPENCE, W. (1815-70). An Introduction to Entomology. London. Some eight 
editions, some with 2-4 volumes, all containing references to mosquitoes. Preface to Ed. 5 
(1828) gives a short history of entomology mentioning Reaumur, De Geer and others. The 
People’s Edition (1870) refers to breeding in fountains and use of fish. Vol. I, pp. 59-63. 
KLEEMAN, C. F. C. (1792). Beitriige zur Natur- und Insekten-geschichte. Theil I, Anhang zu den 
Roselischen Insekten-Belustigungen. Niirnberg. Vol. I, pp. 125-48. 
LATREILLE, P. A. See under CUVIER (18 17). Also short sections in various publications : (1805) 
Buflon’s Hist. Nat. 92 (14 of Insectes), 284; (1807) Genera Crust. et Insectes, 4, 246; (1810) 
Consid. g&&ales sur Z’ordre des animaux, etc. (under ‘Cousin’), pp. 376-9; (1825) Fam. nat. 
du rsgne animal, p. 482. Paris. 
LEDERMULLER, M. F. (1761). Der Schnackenwurm ein Schlammwasser Insekt. Micr. Gemiiths- 
und Augen-Ergiitzung, 2, 154-6. 
LEEUWENHOEK, A. See under DOBELL (1932). 
LICHTENSTEIN, A. A. H. (1800). Beschreibung eines neu entdeckten Wasserinsekts. Arch. ZooZ. 
und Zoot. 1, 168. 
HISTORICAL 
MEIGEN, J. W. (1818). See under (e). 
MEINERT, F. (1886). See under (d). 
NUTTALL and SHIPLEY (1901). See under (d). 
OLIVIER, G. A. (1791). ‘Cousin Culex’ in Histoire naturelle des insectes. Paris. Vol. VI. 
Encyclopedic methodique, etc. 
PACKARD, A. S. JN. (1869). Guide to the Study of Insects. Salem, pp. 368-70. 
PAGENSTECHER, A. (1874). Ueber d. Schnacke (Culex pipiens). FtihZings Landw. Ztg., 
Jena, 23. 
SLABBER (1781). Culex pipiens oder Wurm von der Singschnacke. Physikal Belustigungen oder 
microscopische Wahrnehmungen, etc. Niirnberg. 
(d) EARLY OBSERVATIONS ON STRUCTURE 
ANTHONY, J. (1871). Note on paper by Woodward. Amer. Mon. Micr. J. 6, 256-7. 
BARTH, J. M. See under (b). 
BECHER, E. (1882). Zur Kenntnis der Mundteile der Dipteren. Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 45, 
123-60. 
BLANCHARD, E. (1849). See under (c). 
BRAUER, F. (1883). See under (c). 
CHILD, C. M. (1894). Ein bisher wenig beachtetes antennales Sinnesorgane der Insekten mit 
besonderer Berticksichtigung der Culiciden und Chironomiden. 2. wiss. Zool. 58, 475-530. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). Anatomy and histology of the female mosquito. Repts. Mal. Comm. 
Roy. Sot. Ser. 4. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1881). Anatomy of the Mouth-parts and Sucking Apparatus of some Diptera. 
Williams and Co., Boston. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1883). Anatomy of the mouth parts and suctorial apparatus of Culex. Psyche, 3, 
231-41. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1884). Male Culex drinking. Psyche, 4, 147. 
DUFOUR, L. (1851). Recherches anatomique et physiologique sur les Dip&es. M&m. Acad. Sci., 
Paris, 11, 205-10. 
DURKEE, S. (1855). On the sting of Culexpipiens. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 5, 104, 106. 
FICALBI, E. (1899). See under (e). 
FINLAY, C. J. (1886). See under (f). 
GERSTFELDT, G. (1853). Ueber die Mundteile der saugenden Insekten. Dorpat. 
GRANDPR& A. D. and CHARMOY, D. DE E. (1900). Les moustiques: anatomie et biologic. The 
Planter’s and Commercial Gaz. Press, Port Louis, Mauritius. 
GRASSI, B. (1900). Studi di uno zoologo sulla malaria. Rome. 
HALLER, G. (1878). Kleinere Bruchstiicke zur vergleichenden Anatomie der Arthropoden. 
I. Ueber das Athmungsorgan der Stechmiickenlarve. Arch. Naturgesch. Jahrg. 44, 1, 91-5. 
HOGG, J. (1854). The Microscope, its History, Construction and Application. Plate IX, fig. 7. Also 
many later editions. 
HOGG, J. (1871). On gnat’s scales. Amer. Mon. Micr. J. 6, 192-4. 
HOOKE, R. (1665). See under (b). 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1900). Notes on the mosquitoes of the United States giving some account of 
their structure and biology with remarks on remedies. U.S. Dept. Agric., Div. Ent. Bull. 25. 
HURST, C. M. (1890). On the life history and development of a gnat (Czdex). Guardian Press, 
Manchester. For other papers see references in later chapters dealing with structure of the 
larva and pupa. 
JOHNSTON, C. (1855). Auditory apparatus of the Culex mosquito. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. (old series), 
3, 97-102. 
KELLOG, V. L. (1899). The mouth-parts of the Nematocerous Diptera. Psyche, 8, 355-9. 
KOWALEVSKY, A. (1889). Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Excretions-organe. Biol. Zbl. 9, 42-7. 
KRAEPELIN, K. (1882). Ueber die Mundwerkzeuge der saugenden Insekten. Zool. Anz. 5, 547-9. 
LACORDAIRE, T. (1838). Introduction a Z’entomologie. Libr. Encyc. de Roret. Paris. Vol. II. With 
two plates showing digestive organs, tracheae, heart, etc. 
16 
REFERENCES 
LECAILLON, A. (1899). Sur les prolongements ciliformes de certaines cellules du cousin adulte, 
Culex pipiens L. (Dipt.). Bull. Sot. ent. Fr. 1899, pp. 353-4. 
LECAILLON, A. (1900). Recherches sur la structure et le developpement post-embryonnaire de 
l’ovaire des insectes. I, Culex pipiens. . . . Bull. Sot. ent. Fr. 1900, pp. 96-100. 
LINNAEUS, C. (1758). Systema Naturae. Facsimile reprint of first volume. British Museum 
Publications (1939). 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1887). Poison fangs and glands of the mosquito. Science, 10, 106-7. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1888). The poison apparatus of the mosquito. Amer. Nat. 22, 884-8. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1898). Editorial, Brit. Med. J. 2, 901-3. Gives Macloskie’s figures. 
MAYER, A. M. (1874). Experiments on the supposed auditory apparatus of the mosquito. Amer. 
Nat. 8, 577-92. 
MAYER, P. (1879). Sopra certi organi di senso nelle antennae dei ditteri. Rome. 
MEINERT, F. (188 1). Fluernes munddele trophi dipterorum. Copenhagen, pp. 36-40 and plate 1. 
MEINERT, F. (1886). De eucephale myggellarven. K. Danske vidensk. Selsk. Skr. (6), 3, 373493. 
MIALL, L. C. (1895). The Natural History of Aquatic Insects. Macmillan and Co., London. 
Reprinted 1903, 1912, 1922, 1934. 
MUIR, W. (1883). The head and sucking apparatus of the mosquito. Canad. Nat. Quart. J. Sci. 
(2), 10, 465-6. 
MURPHY, E. (1883). The proboscis and sucking apparatus of the mosquito genus Culex. Canad. 
Nat. Quart. J. Sci. (2), 10, 463-4. 
NEWMAN, E. (1872-3). Scales in Diptera. Entomologist, 6, 9-l 1. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1901-3). J. Hyg., Camb., 1, 45-77, 269-76, 45 l-84 : 
2, 58-84; 3, 166-255. 
POUCHET, G. (1847). Sur l’apparat digestif du cousin (Culex pipiens Linn.). C.R. Acad. Sci., 
Paris, 25, 589-91. 
RASCHKE, E. W. (1887). Die Larve von Culex nemorosus. Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Insekten- 
Anatomie und Histologie. Arch. Naturgesch. Jahrg. 53, 1, 133-63. Also 2001. Anz. 10, 
18-19 (abstract only). 
REAUMUR, R. A. F. DE (1738). See under (b). 
ROFFREDI, D. M. (1766-9). Memoire sur le trompe du cousin et sur celle du taon. Misc. Taurin. 
Melang. Phil. Math. Sot. R. Turin, 4, l-46. (Copy in Royal Society Library, London.) 
SAMGNY, J. C. (1816). Memoires sur les animaux suns vertebres. Gabriel Dufour, Paris. Part I, 
Premier fast. Mem. 1, p. 25. 
SCHINDLER, E. (1878). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Malpighi’schen Gefasse der Insekten. 2. wiss. 
Zool. 30, 587-660. 
SMITH, J. B. (1890). A contribution towards a knowledge of the mouth-parts of the Diptera. 
Trans. Amer. Ent. Sot. 17, 319-39. 
SMITH, J. B. (1896). An essay on the development of the mouth parts of certain insects. Trans. 
Amer. Phil. Sot. (n.s.) 19, 175-98. 
SULZER, J. H. (1761). Die Kennzeichen der Insekten. Heidegger, Zurich. 
SWAMMERDAM, J. See under (b). 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901-10). See under (e). 
WIELOWIEJSKI, H. R. VON (1886). Uber das Blutgewebe der Insekten. 2. wiss. Zool. 43, 512-36. 
(Describes larval oenocytes.) 
WOODWARD, J. J. (1876). On the marking of the body scales of the English gnat and the American 
mosquito. Amer. Mon. Micr. J. 15, 253-5. 
(e) EARLY SYSTEMATIC WORK ON MOSQUITOES 
ARRIBALZAGA, E. L. (1891). Dipterologia Argentina. Rev. Mus. la Plats (Culicidae), 1, 345-77; 
2, 131-74. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). Fauna of British India. Diptera. Taylor and Francis, London. Vol. v. 
COQUILLETT, D. W. (1896). New Culicidae from North America. Canad. Ent. 28, 43. 
DOLESCHALL, C. L. (1858). Derde Bijdrage tot de kennis der Dipterologische Fauna van Neder- 
landsch Indie. Natuurwet. Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind, 17, 73-128. 
2 =7 CH 
HISTORICAL 
DYAR, H. G. (1922). Mosquitoes of the United States. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. 62, no. 2447, 
l-l 19. 
DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1906). Mosquitoes of the United States. J. N.Y. Ent. Sot. 14, 188. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1932). Genera insectorum. Brussels. Fast. 194. Fam. Culicidae. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region. Vol. III. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), 
London. 
FABRICIUS, J. C. (1805). Systema antliatorum. Brunsvegae, pp. 33-6. 
FICALBI, E. (1899). Venti specie de zanzare (Culicidae) Italianae. Florence. Reprint of papers in 
Bull. Sot. Ent. Ital. 28, 108-313 (1896) and 31, 46-234 (1899). 
GILES, G. M. (1900). A Handbook of the Gnats or Mosquitoes. John Bale Sons and Danielsson, 
London. Ed. 2, 1902. 
GRASSI, B. (1900). See under (d). 
HASSELQUIST, F. (1757). Iter Palestinum eller Resa tilHeliga Landet, 1749-52. Lars Salvii, Stockholm. 
HASSELQUIST, F. (1762). Reise nach Palestina. Later edition of Hasselquist, 1757, edited in 
respect to nomenclature by Linnaeus. J. Christian Koppe, Rostok. 
LINNAEUS, C. (1735). Systema Naturae. Lugduni, Batavia. Further editions in 1756 (Ed. 9); 
1758 (Ed. 10); 1766-8 (Ed. 12). 
LINNAEUS, C. (1746). Fauna Suecica. Batavia. Further editions in 1761 (Ed. 2), Stockholm; 
1789 (Entomologia: fauna Suecica descr. aucta.), 3, 562. 
LINNAEUS, C. (1806). Linnaeus’s General System of Nuture (English transl.). Lackington Allen 
and Co., London. 
LOEW, H. (1845). Dipterologische Beitrage. Posen, pp. 3-5. 
LOEW, H. (1873). Beschreibungen europliischen Dipteren. Halle. Vol. III. 
MACQUART, J. (1834). Histoire naturelle des insectes. Dipteres. Vol. I, pp. 28-36. 
MACQUART, J. (1838). DiptPres exotiques nouveaux ou peu connus. Vol. I, part 1, pp. 29-36; part 2, 
suppl. 176. 
MACQUART, J. (1839). In Webb and Berthelot. Histoire naturelle des Iles Canaries. Paris, p. 99. 
MACQUART, J. (1854). Dip&es exotiques (Ins. Dipt.) nouveaux ou peu connus. M&m. Sot. Imp. 
Sci. Agric. de Lille. 
MEIGEN, J. W. (1818). Syst. Beschr. bekannt. europ. zwetj?. Insekten. Aachen. Vol. I, pp. 1-12. 
Further editions 1830, vol. VI, pp. 241-3; 1838, vol. VII, pp. l-2. 
ROBINEAU-DESVOIDY, J. B. (1827). Essai sur la tribu des Culicides. Mem. Sot. Hist. Nat., Paris, 
3, 390-486. “/ i3 
SKUSE, F. A. A. (1889). Diptera of Australia. Part 5, Culicidae. Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S.W. (2), 
3, 1717-64. 
SMART, J. (1940). Entomological systematics examined as a practical problem. In Huxley’s New 
Systematics. Clarendon Press, Oxford. Pp. 475-92. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901-10). A Monograph of the Culicidae of the World. Vols. I-V (Bibl. in vol. II). 
Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), London. 
VAN DER WULP, F. M. (1884). Exotic Diptera. Notes from the Leyden Museum, 6, 248-256. 
Vol. VI. 
WALKER, F. R. (1848). List of the Species of Dipterous Insects in the Collection of the British 
Museum. London, Part 1. 
WALKER, F. R. (1851-6). Insecta Britannica: Diptera. London. Vol. III (Culicidae), pp. 242-53. 
WALKER, F. R. (1857-65). J. Proc. Linn. Sot., London, 1857, 1, 6; 1859, 3, 77; 1860, 4, 90; 
1861, 5, 144, 229; 1865, 8, 102. 
WIEDEMANN, C. R. W. (1821). Diptera exotica. Kiliae, Part 1. 
WILLISTON, S. W. (1896). On the Diptera of St Vincent (West Indies). Trans. En?. Sot. Lond. 
1896, pp. 270-2 (Culicidae). 
(f) RESEARCH ON AZ?DES AEGYPTZ AND ITS ROLE IN DISEASE 
AGRAMONTE, A. (1908). A pioneer of research in yellow fever. Brit. Med. J. 1, 1306. 
AGRAMONTE, A. (1908). An account of Dr Louis David Beauperthuy, a pioneer in yellow fever 
research. Boston Med. Surg. J. 158, 927-30. 
REFERENCES 
BANCROFT, T. L. (1899). On the metamorphosis of the young form of Filaria bancrofti Cobb. 
(Filaria sanguinis hominis Lewis ; Filaria nocturna Manson) in the body of Culex ciliaris Linn., 
the house mosquito of Australia. J. Proc. Roy. Sot. N.S. W. 33,48-62. Reprinted in J. Trop. 
Med. (Hyg.), 2, 91-4. 
BANCROFT, T. L. (1906). On the aetiology of dengue fever. Aust. Med. Gaz. 25, 17. 
BEAUPERTHUY, L. D. (1854). Transmission of yellow fever and other diseases by the mosquito. 
Gaz. Ojicial de Cumana. Anno 4, no. 57. Quoted by AGRAMONTE (1908). 
BRUCE, D. (1895). Preliminary Report on the Tsetse-Jly Disease or Nagana in Zululand. Bennet 
and Davis, Durban. 
BRUMPT, E. (1936). Pre’cis de parasitologie. Ed. 5. Masson et Cie, Paris. 
CLELLAND, 5. B. et al. 1918. See references under ‘dengue’ in chapter IV. 
DELBOEUF, J. (1847). Mag. Pittoresque, p. 180. Article referred to in 1895, Rev. Sci., Paris (4), 
4, 729, use of oil. 
DOANE, R. W. (1910). Insects and Disease. Constable and Co. Ltd, London. 
FINLAY, C. J. (1881). El mosquito hipoteticamente considerado coma agente de transmission de 
la fiebbre amarilla. R. Acad. Ciencias Habana, 18, 147-69 (transl. in Rev. Med. Trop. y 
Parasit, Hanaba, 4, 163-84, 1938). 
FINLAY, C. J. (1886). Yellow fever, its transmission by means of the Culex mosquito. Amer. J. 
Med. Sci. 92, 395-409. 
FINLAY, C. J. (1902). Agreement between the history of yellow fever and its transmission by the 
Culex mosquito (Stegomyia of Theobald). J. Amer. Med. Ass. 38, 993-6. 
FINLAY, C. J. (1904). New aspects of yellow fever etiology arising from the experimental findings 
of the last three years. J. Amer. Med. Ass. 42, 430-l. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1893). An experiment against mosquitoes. Insect Life, 5, 12-14, 109-10, 199. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1894). Another mosquito experiment. Insect Life, 6, 90-l. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912-17). The Mosquitoes of North and Central 
America and the West Indies. Vols. I-IV. (1912, vol. I, General, including yellow fever and 
mosquito bionomics ; vol. II, Plates. 1915, vol. III, Systematic. 1917, vol. IV, Systematic, 
including Aedes aegypti.) 
JAMES, S. P. (1900). On the metamorphosis of the Filaria sanguinis hominis in mosquitoes. 
Brit. Med. J. 2, 45, 533-7. 
KING, A. F. A. (1882). The prevention of malaria disease, etc. Trans. Phil. Sot. Wash. Read 
10 February 1882 (printed only in abstract). 
KING, A. F. A. (1883). Insects and disease: mosquitoes and malaria. Pop. Sci. Mon. 23, 644-58. 
LEWIS, T. R. (1878). Remarks regarding the haematozoa found in the stomach of the Culex 
mosquito. Proc. Asiat. Sot. Beng. 1878, pp. 89-93. 
Low, G. C. (1900). A recent observation on Filaria nocturna in Culex: probable mode of infection 
in man. Brit. Med. J. 1, 1456-7. 
MACKERRAS, I. M. (1948). Australia’s Contribution to our Knowledge of Insect-borne Disease. 
The Jackson Lectures. Austral. Med. Publ. Co., Sydney. 
MANSON, P. (1879). On the development of Filaria sanguinis hominis and on the mosquito 
considered as a nurse. J. Linn. Sot. (Zool.), 14, 304-l 1. Read on 7 March 1878. 
MANSON, P. (1884). The metamorphosis of the Filaria sanguinis hominis in the mosquito. Trans. 
Linn. Sot. (2) Zool. 2, part x, 367-88. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). La fievre jaune. Rapports de la Mission 
Francaise. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 17, 665-731. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. (1899). On the role of insects, arachnids and myriapods as carriers in the 
spread of bacterial and parasitic diseases of man and animals. Johns Hopk. Hosp. Rep. 8, l-l 54. 
OTTO, M. and NEUMANN, R. 0. (1905). Studien tiber Gelbfieber in Brasilien. 2. Hyg. InfektKr. 
51, 357-506. 
*REED, W. (1901). The propagation of yellow fever: observations based on recent researches. 
Med. Rec., N. Y., 60, 201-9. 
*REED, W. (1902). Recent researches concerning the etiology, propagation and prevention of 
yellow fever by the U.S. Army Commission. J. Hyg., Camb., 2, 101-19. 
I9 2-2 
HISTORICAL 
*REED, W. and CARROLL, J. (1901). Experimental yellow fever. Boston Med. Surg. J. 144, 586. 
Also: The prevention of yellow fever. Med. Rec., N. Y., 60,641-g. Also (1902): The etiology 
of yellow fever, a supplementary note. Amer. Med. 3, 301-5. 
*REED, W., CARROLL, J. and AGRAMONTE, A. (1901). Papers on yellow fever in many journals 
including: Rev. Med. Trop., Habana, 2, 17-34; Amer. Med. 2, 15-33; Trans. Ass. Amer. Phys. 
16; J. Amer. Med. Ass. 36, 43 l-40; Med. Rec., N. Y., 59, 269-70. 
*REED, W., CARROLL, J., AGRAMONTE, A. and LAZEAR, J. W. (1900). The etiology of yellow fever. 
A preliminary note. Philad. Med. J. 6, 790-6. Also: Etiologia de la fiebre amarilla. Nota 
preliminar. Rev. Med. Trop., Habana, 1, 49-64. 
Ross, R. (1898). Report on the cultivation of Proteosoma Labbe in grey mosquitoes. Zndian Med. 
Gaz. 33, 173-$401-8, 448-51. 
RUSSELL, P. F. (1955). Man’s Mastery of Malaria. Oxford Univ. Press, London, New York and 
Toronto. 
SMITH, T. and KILBOURNE, F. L. (1893). Investigations into the nature, causation and prevention 
of Texas or Southern Cattle Fever. Bur. Anim. Znd., U.S. Dept. Agric. Bull. 1, p. 301. 
SOUTHEY, R. (1812). Omniana or horae otiosiores. Vol. I, pp. 55-6, use of oil. (Copy in the Univ. 
Library, Cambridge.) 
STILES, C. W. (1901). Insects as disseminators of disease. Virginia Med. (Semi-)Mon. 6, 53-8. 
* Many papers relating to the work of the U.S. Yellow Fever Commission have been 
ment publication (Senate document). Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. reprinted in 1911 in a Govern- 
20 
II 
SYSTEMATIC 
(a) SYNONYMY 
Though the name Aede,s aegypti (L.) is now in general use and has been for more than two 
decades, the species has appeared under many other names in the past. Recently the 
question of nomenclature has again arisen (see Mattingly, 1957), and some account of 
previous changes in this respect seems called for. 
Identified by Theobald (1901) as Culex fasciatus Fabr. 1805 (type ?(?), non-existent, 
West Indies) and made the type species of his genus Stegomyia, the species was for many 
years known as Stegomyia fasciata. As early as 1905, however, Blanchard had contended 
that the name fasciata was pre-occupied by fasciatus given to a mosquito by de Villers 
(1789) and that the name had also been previously used by Meigen (1804) for a European 
species, Culex fascia&s Meigen, 1804 (now thought to be A&Zes communis (Deg.)). There- 
fore the name fasciata as applied by Theobald was invalid, the correct specific name being 
calopus Meigen, 1818 (type 9 $, non-existent, Portugal). By 1913, too, the amended 
comprehensive genus &des had been established including Stegomyia as a subgenus and 
thus the name became Acdes calopus Meigen, 1818, the name Stegomyia, if used, being 
placed in brackets as the subgenus. 
The change of name to calopus was not, however, to escape criticism, and Theobald 
(1907) pointed out that De Villers’ description was insufficient to enable his species to be 
identified and that the type was non-existent. Further, Austen (1912) drew attention to the 
fact that De Villers had not described a new species, but had referred to one described by 
Mi.iller in 1764. Miiller was describing the fauna of Fridrichdal and from his description 
Edwards (1933) considered Miiller’s species to be most probably Culex pipiens, as have 
other authors since, for example Natvig (1948) in his excellent work on the Scandinavian 
mosquito fauna. There remained, however, little doubt but that the name fasciatus as 
applied to the species was invalid. Even if, under some special exempting clause in the 
rules of nomenclature, fasciatus Fabr., removed to the genus Ai;des, could be held not to 
have become permanently invalid as a homonym, it still would be invalid as antedated by 
fasciatus Mg., now also in the genus AFdes. The name calopus, indeed, though never in such 
familiar and universal use as the name it displaced, became increasingly employed from 
about 1907, indeed generally so by the more systematically-minded observers. The name 
was, however, eventually by-passed by the finding by Knab (1916) of a name and descrip- 
tion which clearly applied to the species and pre-dated both fasciatus and calopus, namely 
CuZex argenteus Poiret, 1787. 
Poiret’s description leaves no doubt as to the species described. After saying that it is 
the commonest mosquito in Barbary he continues: ‘ 11 est de la grosseur du notre, mais si 
richement pare, que je lui ai souvent pardon& ses piquures pour le plaiser de l’admirer. Tout 
son corps, particulierement le dos, est couvert d’ecailles argentees, placees sur lui comme 
autant de paillettes orbiculaires et brillantes. Ses pattes sont or&es de bandes alternatives 
21 
SYSTEMATIC 
brune & argentees.’ The name Ak;des argenteus was adopted by Edwards (1921) in his 
revision of Palaearctic mosquitoes and was in general use by English writers for some ten 
years. 
American writers, however, very largely followed Dyar, who in 1920 put forward a still 
earlier name, namely aegypti given by Linnaeus in 1762, thus leaving only four years to 
the date 1758, before which any name that might have been given would have no validity. 
It was this last name that was eventually by general agreement accepted, being used by 
Edwards in his revision in the Genera Insectorum (1932) and from 1934 being indexed in 
place of argenteus in English journals. As noted in chapter I, section (e), the name aegypti 
first appears in 1757 in Hassellquist’s account of his travels in Palestine as Culex (aegypti) 
followed without a break by a short Latin description. In the later edition of this work in 
1762, edited as to nomenclature by Linnaeus, the name appears in correct form as Culex 
aegypti. In Opinions 5 and 57 of the International Committee of Zoological Nomenclature 
the question of the validity of re-edited pre-Linnaean names is considered, and in the last- 
mentioned Opinion it was given that the German translation by Gadebusch, published in 
1762, does not give validity to the names published in the original edition. A later Opinion, 
Opinion 175, however, states that: ‘A work the names of which on account of date were 
invalid is considered as far as nomenclatural requirements go as having never been 
published.’ Opinion 5, however, still required that reprinted pre-Linnaean names should 
be reinforced by adoption or acceptance by the author who published the reprint. It has 
generally been accepted that Linnaeus reinforced by adoption and acceptance the name 
aegypti and that the name &des aegypti is by the rules of nomenclature correct. 
Nevertheless, the question of the correct nomenclature has again been raised. In the first 
place, Mattingly (1953) (see also Mattingly and Knight, 1956) has expressed the opinion 
that it was probably the pale form, var. queenslandensis (see section (c)), that was described 
by Linnaeus, since this form occurs in Egypt and would seem to be indicated by the 
description. If this were so, it would be the pale form that was the type form and that 
usually accepted as the type form that would be the variety. An even more serious objec- 
tion to the name aegypti has since been put forward by Mattingly (1957). This author points 
out that at the time when adoption of the name aegypti was under consideration and was 
used by Edwards, the objection was put forward by Patton (1933) that the species described 
by Linnaeus was more probably another species very cornmon in Egypt, namely Ai;des 
(Ochlerotatus) caspius. Mattingly further points out that the wording of the Latin descrip- 
tion by Linnaeus in his opinion leaves no doubt whatever but that the species described was 
that now known as A. (Ochlerotatus) caspius Pallas, 1771. 
A few words may here be said regarding this latest point in the synonymy and the 
literature relating to it. One of the earliest authors to give a systematic description of 
Egyptian mosquitoes was Gough (1914). Gough in his list of species gives Stegomyia 
fasciata Fabr., clearly indicating the species now under consideration. He says it is not 
rare in Egypt and gives localities from which it has been recorded. He also notes that a 
specimen of var. queenslandensis has been taken at Suez. The name aegypti is also given, 
but having as a synonym Aedes (Ochlerotatus) dorsalis Meigen, a species very close to 
A&des caspius. Later Kirkpatrick (1925) in his monograph on the mosquitoes of Egypt 
records the species as Ai;des (Stegomyia) argenteus (the name then in general use) and in 
a list of synonyms beneath the name gives ‘ ? CuZex aegypti Linne’. When later the name 
argenteus was beginning to give place to aegypti an interesting discussion took place in 
22 
SYNONYMY 
1933 between Patton, who pointed out that Linnaeus’s description could not apply to the 
species but was a description of A&&s caspius, and Edwards, who was unwilling to change 
the name aegypti and taking the various points in the description maintained that this 
might well refer to the species. The name aegypti, indeed, continued to be used and has, 
without further challenge, remained the accepted name up to the present time. Should the 
wording of the original description indicate, as Mattingly maintains, not A. aegypti as 
now known, but A. caspius, an interesting point in synonymy will arise, more especially 
as to how far (1) the evidence for a change can be proven, and, should this be so, (2) how 
far can long and wide use of a name in the literature be held as valid for an Opinion of the 
International Committee of Zoological Nomenclature to establish retention of the name 
in use.* 
For the verbatim text of early descriptions by authors see volume 4 of Howard, Dyar and 
Knab (19 17). For information regarding types see Edwards (1941). For literature relating 
to recent questions in synonymy see Seidelin (1912); Gough (1914); Knab (1916); Dyar 
(1920); Kirkpatrick (1925); Patton (1933); Edwards (1933); Mattingly (1957). A useful 
list of the International Rules of Zoological Nomenclature is given by Wenyon (1926). 
Other names than those referred to above that have been given to the species are now 
regarded as synonyms. About twenty-four such are listed by Dyar (1928) and are given 
here in an accompanying list with the country from which the species under the name was 
described. For varietal names see section (c). 
List giving localities of syn0nyms.t 
Culex aegypti Linnaeus 1762. Egypt. 
Culex argenteus Poiret 1787. North Africa. 
Culex fasciatus Fabricius 1805. West Indies. 
Culex calopus Meigen 1818. Portugal. 
Culex mosquito Rob.-Desvoidy 1827. Cuba. 
Culex frater Rob.-Desvoidy 1827. West Indies. 
Culex taeniatus Wiedemann 1828. Savannah (Georgia U.S.). 
Culex kounoupi Brulle 1836. Morea (Greece). 
Culex niveus Eichwald 1837. Caspian area. 
Culex annulitarsis Macquart 1839. Canary Islands. 
Culex viridifrons Walker 1848. Greece. 
Culex excitans Walker 1848. Georgia. 
Culex formosus Walker 1848. West Africa. 
Culex inexarabilis Walker 1848. West Africa. 
Culex exagitans Walker 1856. Para (Brazil). 
Culex impatibilis Walker 1860. Makassar (Celebes). 
Culex zonatipes Walker 1861. New Guinea. 
Culex bancrofti Skuse 1889. Australia. 
Culex elegans Ficalbi 1889. Italy. 
Culex rossi Giles 1899. India. 
Stegomyia nigeria Theobald 1901. Nigeria. 
Culex anguste-alatus Becker 1908. Canary Islands. 
Culex albopalposus Becker 1908. Canary Islands. 
Duttonia alboannulis Ludlow 19 11. Philippines. 
* Since the above was written Mattingly (Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. (c), 22, 23, 1957) notes that application has 
been made to the International Commission to fix the name aegrpti by attaching it to a neotype. As noted, this will 
involve some further problems in connection with the choice of neotype. The important point in the present author’s 
opinion is that so well established a name for this common and important mosquito should not be changed. 
t For references see Dyar (1928). 
23 
SYSTEMATIC 
(6) SYSTEMATIC POSITION AND IDENTIFICATION 
SYSTEMATIC POSITION 
AZdes aegypti is the type species of the subgenus Stegomyia Theobald, 1901, of the genus 
Ai;des Meigen, 1818, as amended by Edwards (1932) to include some fourteen previously 
erected genera and about 400 species. Though Ai;des aegypti is not the type for the genus 
AFdes, this being A. cinereus Mg., it is very representative in many respects of this large 
section of the Culicini, which contrasts with another large section, namely the genus Culex 
and allied genera, notably in: (a) the retracted eighth abdominal segment in the female; 
(b) the possession of toothed claws in the female; (c) the absence of pulvilli; (d) the laying 
of eggs singly and not in rafts; (e) being composed largely of dark and often highly orna- 
mented species, especially so in the subgenus Stegomyia. 
Synoptic tables for distinguishing the many subgenera of AEdes are given by Barraud 
(1934) for the genus as a whole, and by Edwards (1941) for subgenera occurring in the 
Ethiopian Region, but precise characterisation is difficult. Distinction depends largely on 
genitalic characters and the form of the male palps (Edwards, 1941, p. 107). The distinctive 
characters of the subgenus Stegomyia as given by Theobald are the flat scaling of the vertex, 
except for a narrow row of upright scales posteriorly, and the flat scaling of all three lobes 
of the scutellum. Other characters distinguishing the subgenus Stegomyia (including those 
of the male genitalia) are noted by Edwards (1941) when indicating the subgenus (p. 125). 
Some seventy or more species have been described in the subgenus, the classification 
and grouping of which are discussed by Edwards (1932) and more recently by Mattingly 
(1952, 1953) ; Knight and Hurlbut (1949) ; and by Marks (1954). Synoptic tables for adults 
and fourth-stage larvae are given by Edwards (1941) and by Mattingly (1952) for Ethiopian 
species ; by Barraud for species from India and Burma; by Bonne-Wepster and Brug 
(1932) for species of the Malay Archipelago ; and by Marks for the scutellaris group of the 
eastern Oriental and Australasian Regions. For larvae of the Ethiopian Region see also 
Hopkins (1936, 1951). 
Recent work has added very greatly to knowledge of many of the less-known species, 
and this applies to species closely related to or closely resembling ACdes aegypti such as are 
discussed under Identification, as also to some of the varietal forms dealt with later. But 
much regarding some of these forms has still to be worked out, making the subject one 
that must be regarded as yet to some extent still under review (see Mattingly, 1952, 1953). 
IDENTIFICATION 
Fortunately identification of A. aegypti normally offers few difficulties, since it has very 
characteristic thoracic markings that almost alone serve to distinguish it. In addition the 
marking of the mid-femur, namely a white line on the anterior surface extending from the 
base almost to the tip, is peculiar to this species of Stegomyia, as is almost equally so the 
patch of white scales on each side of the clypeus in the female. The clypeus of the male is 
usually, however, bare or has only a few scales. 
The thoracic markings as normally present consist of two crescentic patches of white 
scales, one on each side of the anterior half of the scutum, between which in the middle 
line of the thorax and passing back nearly to the scutellum are two narrow parallel white 
lines (Fig. 46). In addition there are two fine white lines passing from the posterior ends 
24 
POSITION AND IDENTIFICATION 
of the crescentic marks to the lateral lobes of the scutellum, thus completing the so-called 
‘ lyre-shaped ’ ornamentation. In the pale form, var. queenslandensis (see next section), 
markings may be obscured by pale scaling and, though this would appear to be unusual, 
Edwards refers to the white median lines as being sometimes yellowish. 
A number of other species of Stegomyia have white shoulder marks and some approxi- 
mation to the ornamentation in Ai;des aegypti. But in most species where such resemblance 
occurs the shoulder marks are more wedge-shaped or rounded, and, in place of the twin 
median parallel white lines, these are yellow or a single median white line is present. Some 
useful figures showing the thoracic ornamentation of a number of species are given by 
Edwards (1941). A figure of the markings of the common African species, A. africanus, 
with one of A. pseudo-ajiicanus, is given by Mattingly and Bruce-Chwatt (1954). The species 
most nearly resembling A. aegypti in their thoracic markings are: A. subargenteus Edw., 
1925, and its varietal form, or possibly a distinct species, var. kivuensis Edw., 1941;* 
A. woodi Edw., 1922; certain species that might be confused with the pale variety of 
A. aegypti, namely A. mascarensis and A. vinsoni both from Mauritius.? 
In A. subargenteus the crescentic shoulder marks are described as abbreviated anteriorly 
and the fine lines passing from these to the scutellum are yellow. The mid-femur, instead of 
being uniformly striped, has a separate white spot about its middle. Var. kivuensis differs 
from subargenteus in the tarsal markings, the fourth hind tarsal segment being all white 
instead of being pale at the base only. Also the median lines of the thorax are deep yellow 
(see recent description given by Mattingly, 1952). A. woodi has the lateral lobes of the 
scutellum clothed with dark scales, which at once distinguishes this species from A. aegypti 
where all three lobes are white-scaled. All the above forms were originally described from 
Nyasaland, the first-mentioned being recorded later from a considerable number of widely 
dispersed localities on the east of the African continent from Kenya to Cape Province. 
Var. kivuensis has been recorded up to date from only one locality in the Belgian Congo. 
A. woodi has been recorded from Nyasaland, Kenya and Mozambique. (For recent 
information see Mattingly, 1953 .) 
It should be noted that some species of subgenus Finlaya of the genus Agdes have 
thoracic ornamentation with some resemblance to that of A. aegypti. Little difficulty, 
however, should arise except in rubbed specimens since the scutellum would fail to show 
the flat scaling of all three lobes characteristic of Stegomyia. $ Also superficially resembling 
Stegomyia in Central and South America is the important genus Haemogogus. In this case 
the large and approximated pronotal lobes suffice to distinguish from Stegomyia. This 
character also serves for the forest genus Heizmannia, in which in addition the postnotum 
carries a group of small hairs. For accounts of these New World species see Dyar (1928). 
White scaling on the clypeus. White scaling on the clypeus is given by Ludlow (1911) in her 
original description of Duttonia alboannulis, and is suggestive of the correctness of the 
sinking of this species under A&des aegypti (see list of synonyms in preceding section). 
White scales on the clypeus are also recorded by Dyar and Knab (1910), for some pale 
specimens among a number of normal A. aegypti received by these authors from Malaga, 
* Now given by Mattingly (1953), p. 9, as a distinct species. 
t A&&s (S.) simpsoni should also be given here. See figure of this species given by Muspratt (1956), p. 49. 
j: A few Ai;dmorphus with shoulder marks somewhat like AZdes aegypti may have flat scaling of the head or 
scutellum, but the clubbed style of the coxite in the male would distinguish any such with help of synoptic tables 
for the subgenus. 
25 
SYSTEMATIC 
Spain. Presence of white scales on the clypeus in the female is almost diagnostic of 
A. aegypti, but is described in A. (Stegomyia) vittatus and possibly in A. (Stegomyia) 
trinidad from Fernando PO (Edwards, 1941). * 
Banding of the proboscis. In the majority of species of the subgenus, as in A. aegypti, the 
proboscis is without pale banding. Pale banding, however, is usually present in A. vittatus. 
Leg markings. The marking of the mid-femur as already described would seem quite 
peculiar to A. aegypti. The tibiae in Stegomyia are usually dark. The tarsal banding is used 
in synoptic tables to differentiate between some species, the fourth hind tarsal segment 
being white at the base in a number of species including subargenteus, but all white in 
kivuensis and all black in woodi and simpsoni. The extent of banding of the third hind tarsal 
and in some cases other tarsal segments may also be a differential character. The wings 
are usually all dark-scaled, but in A. aegypti and some other species there is a characteristic 
small pale spot at the base of the costa. 
Genitalic characters. Characters differentiating the male terminalia in A. aegypti are: 
(a) ninth tergite with two prominent conical lateral lobes carrying a few short hairs, between 
which is a deeply hollowed out V-shaped embayment ; (b) the style of the clasper widened 
in the middle; (c) lateral processes of the paraprocts nearly as long as the terminal pro- 
cesses; (d) lateral plates of the phallosome with fine teeth only. The basal lobe in A. aegypti 
and related species is a flattish plaque on the inner membranous aspect of the coxite. In 
A. aegypti it has no projecting process forming a separate claspette or harpago as in some 
species. Recently Iyengar and Menon (1955) have described three or four characteristic 
hooked spines arising from the lobe in A. aegypti (see also Ross and Roberts, 1943). 
A full description of the parts in A. aegypti is given later when describing the structure of 
the species in detail (see p. 458). 
In A. subargenteus, as noted by Edwards (1941), the ninth tergite is convex, with the 
approximated rather flat lobes carrying a row of large hairs, and the basal arms of the 
proctiger are short, not long as in A. aegypti. The coxite also differs, having a small hairy 
lobe towards the base on the dorsal surface, and the style is somewhat curved and tapering, 
with the terminal spine stout, not thin as in A. aegypti. The phallosome is as in A. aegypti. 
The male terminalia of kivuensis have not up to date of writing been described; those of 
woodi are stated by Mattingly (1952) to be virtually identical with those of simpsoni. 
Pupal characters. Those distinguishing A. aegypti are: (a) trumpets triangular, without 
transverse folds (see Theodor, 1924); (b) paddles with a single hair about one-quarter of 
the length of the paddle ; (c) no accessory hair; (d) chaeta A on abdominal segments 
II-VI spine-like. Synoptic tables for pupal characters in a number of species of Stegomyia 
are given by Ingram and Macfie (1917); Theodor (1924); Baisas (1938); Edwards (1941). 
Larval characters. Larval characters distinguishing A. aegypti are: (a) antennae smooth, 
antenna1 hair simple; (b) comb teeth 8-12 in a single row with strong basal lateral denticles; 
(c) pecten teeth on the siphon 15-20, none widely spaced; (d) pleural hairs of the meso- and 
metathorax with conspicuous thorn-like processes. Recently Iyengar and Menon described 
* Mattingly (1952), however, states that the type of Atides trinidud (now sunk as a synonym of A. dendrophilus 
Edw., see Mattingly, lot. cit.) has not got scale tufts on the clypeus, frosting of the integument having been mistaken 
in the original description for these, and that A. aegypti is distinguished from all other Stegomyia by this character. 
26 
POSITION AND IDENTIFICATION 
a single pecten tooth well separated and situated distal to the siphon hair, a character 
previously thought to be diagnostic of A. vittatus. These authors note that, very rarely, there 
may be an additional irregular series of pecten spines situated ventral to the main row. 
Additional teeth on the siphon may, however, as noted by Mattingly (1955), occasionally 
occur in other species. Very similar larval characters are present in A. mascarensis (but 
pecten spines only 8-12) and in A. metallicus (antennae as in A. aegypti, but the spines of 
the pleural hairs much longer). Synoptic tables for larvae of African species of Stegomyia 
are given by Hopkins (1936,195l) and by Mattingly (1952). The latter author, in 1953, also 
gave recent information regarding the larvae of a number of the less known species of the 
subgenus. 
(c) VARIETIES, STRAINS, HYBRIDS, 
GYNANDROMORPHS AND MUTANTS 
There is a considerable recent literature on the systematics and genetics of A. aegypti and 
its different forms, and space does not permit of more than the main outline of such work 
being here given. For further information the references given in the text may be consulted. 
A good and interesting account of recent ideas on the origin and build up of the species 
will be found in the paper given as in the press by Mattingly (1957). 
VARIETIES 
Few named varieties have been described that are not now regarded as synonyms. Theobald 
(1901) refers to var. mosquito (Culex mosquito Rob.-Desv.) as somewhat distinct (thorax 
with semilunar lines only) but sinks it under the species. Var. mosquito Arrib. he states is 
typical of the species. Var. persistans Banks is also stated by Theobald (1910) not to differ 
in the description given from the type form. Of the two varieties described by Theobald 
himself, var. Zuciensis (Theobald, 1901, p. 297) has the apical tip of the last tarsal segment 
black, whereas it is white in the type form. The variety was originally described from 
Demerara and St Lucia, but has been noted as occurring occasionally in India (Barraud, 
1934) and in Malaya (Stanton, 1920). The dark tarsal tip, however, is not unusual in the 
species from many areas (see later). 
The second of Theobald’s varieties, var. queenslandensis (Theobald, 1901, p. 297), was 
described and named from specimens sent by Dr Bancroft from Burpengary, South 
Queensland as Culex bancrofti Skuse. C. bancrofti is described by Skuse as having the 
thorax with lyre-shaped markings, the subjacent cuticle dark brown and covered with 
brown scales, the description conforming to what is usually regarded as the type form under 
which the species was sunk by Theobald. Var. queenslandensis Theobald describes as having 
the thoracic scaling golden brown, the mid-lobe of the scutellum covered with a patch of 
deep purple scales, and a broad band of the same down the dorsum of the abdomen. In 
one specimen the entire abdomen was covered with creamy scales. Theobald (1903, p. 144) 
also gives as this variety a form from the Seychelles, the abdomen being as in the Australian 
form, but the hind tarsi mostly with a distinct black apical band. 
A form var. atritarsis is described by Edwards (1920). It has the tarsi of the forelegs 
almost entirely black, the hind tarsi with very narrow white rings at bases of segments 1-3 
and 5, segment 4 being almost entirely black. The palpi in the male have the white rings 
27 
SYSTEMATIC 
narrower than usual. The terminalia are given by Edwards (1941) as of the type form; he 
states that the variety has been found only on the Gold Coast and may possibly be a 
genuine local form rather than a sporadic variation. 
Two forms of the species are noted by Hill (1921) to occur in northern Queensland, 
namely a small dark form occurring away from habitations and a larger pale form fre- 
quenting the hospital buildings. The dark form was collected from a tin containing about 
five inches of water and decaying leaves in dense scrub on an island 600 yards from the 
nearest seaside dwellings about four miles from Townsville. Several adult Stegomyia were 
captured at the same time attempting to bite. A similar dark form was collected from a 
tree-hole in the hospital grounds seventy yards from the nearest dwelling. In the hospital 
building the species was paler and larger. The ‘dark’ form collected from the tin when 
bred for four generations produced in each generation after the first a proportion of 
individuals of both forms as well as intermediate forms. The ‘light’ form bred true. The 
males in both cases were dark and of the usual size. 
Two forms are described by Legendre (1927) as ‘ geographical races’, namely a small 
form having thin pale larvae with contrasting dark siphon, Oceano-Indian in distribution 
and occurring in Hanoi, Madagascar and Syria; and a large form with thick dark larvae 
occurring on the west coast of Africa. 
In Lagos Summers-Connal (1927) observed the species to be subject to considerable 
variation. Some specimens have the abdomen entirely black except for the lateral spots, 
some completely covered with white scales or scattered white or yellow scales giving a 
brindled effect. The hind tarsi may be as in the type form, or the tip, or a quarter to three- 
quarters, of the last segment may be dark. The material used consisted of 1000 specimens 
of each sex bred consecutively from larvae collected in Lagos by the sanitary authorities. 
The author found hereditary transmission of a number of the variations noted. 
Describing the mosquitoes of British Somaliland, G. R. C. van Someren (1943) notes 
that the species varied from jet black to pale brown, the latter being referred to var. 
queenslandensis Theo. It occurred breeding in water tanks on dhows. A similar pale form 
regarded as var. queenslandensis was described by Lewis (1947) at Port Sudan on the Red 
Sea Coast breeding in water receptacles on sea-going dhows. Inland the species was darker 
along with intermediate and normal forms. The habits of the pale form were stated by 
Lewis not to differ from those of the type form and to be capable of harbouring the virus 
of yellow fever. This characteristic pale form has now been recorded in many coastal 
areas of the East African continent and elsewhere (see distribution given later in this 
section). 
Recently the work of Haddow and others has brought to light the occurrence in Uganda, 
Kenya and elsewhere in Ethiopian Africa of another form, namely a ‘dark’ form found 
breeding in deep forest far removed from habitations and which differs from the type form 
in being noticeably very black with clear-cut markings. Regarding this wild form Haddow 
(1945a, b) notes that, though larvae of kdes aegypti are not uncommon in the Bwamba 
district of Uganda, adults are very rarely taken biting and that the evidence suggests that 
the species may be largely sylvan and zoophilic in the area. Haddow, Gillett and Highton 
(1947, p. 3 19) also note that A. aegypti occupies a peculiar position in Bwamba, being 
present in some uninhabited areas of the Semliki Forest, and that Garnham, Harper and 
Highton (1946) also found it scattered rather profusely through the Kaimosi Forest in Kenya. 
Regarding the biting habits of the species under these conditions these authors note that it 
28 
VARIETIES, STRAINS, HYBRIDS, ETC. 
was not represented in forty catches made in the forest, but that on one occasion thirteen 
specimens were taken biting in the sunset period at heights over fifty feet. 
A similar reference to a ‘pale’ and a ‘ dark’ form occurring in Kenya is made by 
van Someren, Teesdale and Furlong (1955). They give the following description of the 
forms : 
In the pale form the ground colour of the scutum varies from dark brown to pale yellow. 
The vertex is sometimes mainly pale, but usually with a small patch of dark scales on each 
side, or rarely these patches may be large. The first abdominal segment has usually a large 
patch of white scales above, the other segments being lightly or heavily sprinkled with 
white scales, or rarely nearly all scales are white. Occasionally the tergites are dark with 
narrow apical white bands, or more often with broad apical and basal white or yellow, or 
rarely indistinct pale, bands. The hind tarsi are usually as in the type form, but sometimes 
segment 4 has a narrower basal white band and segment 5 a dark band at the tip. 
Of the dark form they note that many hundreds of specimens bred out from larvae 
taken from containers in the bush were consistently dark (black with white markings). 
The following variations in colour were noted: the white bands on the abdominal segments 
were usually well marked, rarely narrow, much reduced or absent; the first tergite was 
usually all black above, but sometimes with a small spot of white scales medianly. The hind 
tarsal segments l-3 were white on their basal third or fourth, segment 4 three-quarters 
white and segment 5 all white. 
As with the species in the Uganda forests the two forms in the Mombasa area of Kenya 
differed also with respect to their association with man, the dark form tending to be a wild 
form occurring in the bush, whilst the paler form behaved like the type form, being found 
mainly in habitations. The following are captures made respectively in the bush and in 
houses in the area by Mrs E. C. C. van Someren as given by Mattingly (1956) : 
In bush: 125 dark (including 19 males), 5 pale (all females). 
In houses: 7 dark (including 2 males), 232 pale (all females). 
Summarising the forms of the species that are at present usefully to be recognised, 
Mattingly (1957) gives the following: 
1. A. aegypti (L.) s.str., the type form. A brown form, somewhat variable in depth of 
colour, but always distinctly paler and browner (at least in the female) than the black 
African subspecies (no. 3). Extension of pale scaling, if any, limited to bleaching of the 
two dark areas on the back of the head, or the presence of pale scaling on the first abdominal 
tergite or to both together. 
2. A. aegypti var. queenslandensis Theo. Any form showing any one of the following: 
bleaching of the dark scales of the mesonotum from mid-brown through shades of buff to 
almost white; encroachment of the pale basal bands on the abdominal tergites on to the 
apices of the preceding segments, or extension of these bands in the mid-line to form pale 
basal triangles or a continuous median pale line on the abdomen; presence of scattered 
pale scales on the dark areas of the tergites or normally dark areas on the legs. 
3. A. aegypti s.sp. formosus Walker. A form confined to Africa south of the Sahara 
and the only known form in this area except in coastal districts or one or two inland- 
trade-frequented areas. This differs from the type form in the markedly black appearance 
of the dark areas of the thorax and abdomen and entire absence of bleaching or extension 
of pale scaling on any part of the body. The name formosus* used by Mattingly is that 
* The name has no relation with Formosa, being evidently the Latin word for ‘beautiful’. 
29 
SYSTEMATIC 
given by Walker (1848, p. 4) to a specimen from Sierra Leone (type in the British Museum) 
which shows the characters described above, and is the first description of any form from 
the area given as the distributional area of the subspecies. 
In all the forms the characters given relate to the female. The male in all forms is usually 
darker. 
The distribution of these three forms, so far as known at present, is given when dealing 
with the distribution of the species in sections (d) and (e) of this chapter. Very briefly it is 
the type form (associated in many areas with var. queenslandensis) that gives the world- 
wide character to distribution of the species as described later, ssp. formosus being re- 
stricted to Africa south of the Sahara and so not affecting the world extension of the species 
as a whole. The distribution of var. queenslandensis is less easy to specify. It is found along 
with the type form very commonly as a coastal species on the east of the African continent 
and neighbouring countries, as also in the Mediterranean area, notably in North Africa, 
and on the west coast of this continent. It appears to be less common in the Indomalayan 
area where the type form is dominant. It is recorded from Australia (Queensland) along 
with the type form and appears to be a feature of the species in America (Mattingly: 
in lit.). More details are given later in sections (d) and (e). 
Especially in regard to ssp. formosus more information would be very desirable as to its 
exact status and especially regarding structural features other than ornamentation. Up to 
the time of writing there does not appear to be in the literature any careful description of 
the genitalic or larval characters or whether the characteristic scale tufts on the clypeus or 
the stripe on the mid-femora are present. 
Regarding var. queenszandensis there seems little doubt but that this is specifically a form 
of A. aegypti and Dyar and Knab (1910) note the presence of scale tufts on the clypeus in 
the pale form described by them from Malaga, Spain. Its wide distribution along with the 
type form is suggestive that it is a sporadic variation of the species or the effect on this of 
some particular environment. A very characteristic feature of the form is its occurrence 
as a coastal and desert form and, as noted by the present writer (Christophers, 1933), 
specimens of Anopheles from semi-desert conditions, where the species has bred in shallow, 
often saline pools in the open, commonly show a reduced pigmentation (flavism or hypo- 
melanism), whilst melanic forms are commonly encountered in shady places with abundant 
food supply. Of interest in this respect is the occurrence (as noted by Edwards, 1911, 
p. 248) in Algeria, where the pale variety is recorded as common, of an ochreous form of 
Culex pipiens and a pale form of Och. nemorosus (punctor). 
The pale form of AL;des aegypti, however, has been shown to retain, at least to some 
extent, its characters when bred for some generations in the laboratory (Summers-Connal, 
1927; Shidrawi, 1955). Also Mattingly (1953) notes that not all localities on the east coast 
of Africa from which the form has been recorded are areas of low rainfall. Thus it would 
appear that even if the form is the result of some special environment the effect is not one 
merely of a temporary nature but is associated with genetical change. The same might be 
said regarding the occurrence of the form in America referred to later. 
On the species in general Mattingly and Knight (1956) suggest that the dark form 
(s.sp. formosus) represents the original non-domestic species in its original home and 
conditions and that the so-called type form is a later development, possibly largely hybrid 
in character, thus explaining the genetic differences in some geographical forms of the 
species that have been described. 
30 
VARIETIES, STRAINS, HYBRIDS, ETC. 
STRAINS 
Besides the forms described in the last section particular stocks of the species maintained 
in laboratories may be separately indicated or named as strains depending upon the source 
from which the species was originally obtained. Such strains have been found as a rule to 
agree in their main behavioural characters. Brug (192Q studying Cuban and Javanese 
strains, observed no constant differences, except that the head scales in the former were 
lighter. Mathis (1934) studied strains from Athens, Cuba, Dakar and Java and found 
their biology similar. Strains differing in certain respects have, however, been described. 
Examples of differences in biting capacity in strains from different countries are not 
infrequently described in the literature; for example, Gillett and Ross (1955) found diffi- 
culty in getting Malayan A. aegypti to feed on monkeys, whilst African aegypti fed readily. 
Differences have also been frequently referred to in their behaviour when employed for 
crosses between strains as noted in a later section. Recently a study has been made by 
Gillett (1955) of differences in behaviour in respect to ovulation as between a strain from 
Lagos and one from Newala, Tanganyika. In the Lagos strain unmated females usually laid 
eggs within five days of taking a blood meal (86 per cent ovipositing). In the Newala strain 
females rarely laid eggs within this period (8 per cent ovipositing). Females of the Newala 
strain when mated with sexually exhausted males also did not lay infertile eggs to the same 
extent as the Lagos females. 
Other differences relate to capacity to transmit diseases or harbour parasites. Hindle 
(1929) records a strain from Africa maintained for three years in the Wellcome laboratories 
which was a typical rather dark race transmitting yellow fever readily and one from India 
reared by MacGregor that was lighter in colour and a less effective vector. Roubaud, 
Colas-Belcour, Toumanoff and Treillard (1936) found strains behaved differently in their 
capacity to transmit the nematode, DiroJilaria immitis (see also Kartman, 1953). 
The term strain, however, would appear to have a very vague implication. In many 
cases strains have been maintained in culture for long periods, often many years, under 
different techniques, and it would not seem safe to assume that the behaviour of a strain 
that happened to have originally been brought from some particular country necessarily 
represented the naturally occurring form in that country. 
HYBRIDS 
Particularly since Toumanoff’s observations on the result of mating the two distinct species 
A@des aegypti and A. albopictus and the early work of Marshall and Staley (1937) and 
Marshall (1938) on the crossing of nearly related forms in what is now referred to as the 
Culexpipiens complex, a great deal of work has been carried out relating to the genetics of, 
and hybridisation in, mosquitoes. For a very full account of mosquito genetics the com- 
prehensive paper by Kitzmiller (1953) may be consulted, as also the critical review of 
findings to date by Mattingly (1956) under the title ‘ species hybrids in mosquitoes’, with 
which is a very full list of references to recent authors in this connection. 
Toumanoff (1937), using female A. aZbopictus from Hanoi and male A. aegypti from 
Calcutta, obtained fertile offspring for a number of generations. In the opposite direction, 
that is female aegypti and male albopictus, crossing was unsuccessful. The offspring of the 
fertile crossing with a single exception up to generation F, resembled the female parent. 
Hoang-Tich-Try (1939), with the same species in Indochina, obtained the same result. 
31 
SYSTEMATIC 
Downs and Baker (1949) and Bonnet (1950), in New York and Hawaii respectively, also 
obtained fertile offspring from crossing these two species, but in an opposite direction, 
that is aegypti females with albopictus males gave fertile offspring, while albopictus females 
with aegypti males failed to do so. The same result was obtained by Kartman (1953), 
aegypti females and albopictus males giving fertile offspring resembling the female parent, 
whilst crossing in an opposite direction failed. Not all observers, however, have obtained 
positive results with crossing of these two species. MacGilchrist (1913) in Calcutta found 
that, though copulation took place, crossing was unsuccessful. De Buck (1942), though he 
found spermatozoa in the spermathecae, obtained no embryonic development in eggs 
laid by albopictus, and one larva only that hatched from eggs of aegypti died in a few 
hours. 
Later work by Toumanoff (1938-1950) on the crossing of these species and that by a 
number of authors on the crossing of nearly related forms of the Culex pipiens complex 
has shown that transmission of hereditary characters in hybrid forms of mosquitoes is, as 
generally considered, the result of a rare, but recognised, condition known as cytoplasmic 
inheritance, a condition in which inheritance is not of the Mendelian type, but is charac- 
terised by transmission of the female parent’s characters only, female dominance, and 
believed to be the result of transmission through the cytoplasm independent of nuclear 
influence. Not all authorities agree, however, that this is so in all cases. 
The C. pipiens complex consists of a number of related species more or less resembling 
C. pipiens and various forms and local strains of these. It includes C. pipiens; C. fatigans; 
C. quinquejtisciatus; C. pipiens var. pallens; and C. molestus. The last-mentioned species 
occurs in a number of local forms, pairing between which may in some cases be unpro- 
ductive, in some successful in both directions and in some successful only in one. The first 
crosses in this group were those by Marshall and Staley and by Marshall with local forms 
of molestus (see also Tate and Vincent, 1936). More extensive observations in this group 
have since been made by other observers, opening up a wide field of inquiry into the 
genetics and hybridisation of mosquitoes. A review of these findings has recently been 
given by Mattingly (1956). * 
The work of Laven (1953) on the crossing of various local forms of C. molestus appears 
definitely to prove the existence in this group of cytoplasmic inheritance. Thus, by back- 
crossing offspring from crosses in both directions, Laven was able to demonstrate the 
occurrence of a purely maternal type of inheritance, hybrid females being mated with males 
of the male parent form through twenty successive generations without the offspring 
showing other than maternal characters and so giving no indication throughout of nuclear 
effect. 
Mention should also be made of recent observations on the crossing of forms in the 
scutellaris group of Stegomyia. Here also compatibility in one direction has been found 
associated with incompatibility in the other, as also has inheritance of female characters 
only, though sometimes with intergrading. T 
The results recorded above obtained from the crossing of A?des aegypti and A. albopictus 
would appear therefore to be in accordance with other findings of this form of inheritance, 
which is clearly of common occurrence in mosquitoes. Mattingly (1956), however, 
* See also Laven (1951, 1955, 1956a), Laven and Kitzmiller (1954), Knight (1953), Knight and Abdel Malek 
(1951), Kitzmiller (1953), Barr and Kartman (1951), Callot (1947, 1954), and others given in Mattingly’s list. 
t See Woodhill (1949, 1950, 1954), Smith-White (1950), Perry (1950),.Rozeboom (1954b). 
32 
VARIETIES, STRAINS, HYBRIDS, ETC. 
expresses some doubt whether in the case of the two species mentioned absence of nuclear 
effect has been proved. His view in this respect is based on the fact that both in Toumanoff’s 
series and in Bonnet’s there occurred after some generations a stray form resembling the 
male parent, making further observations on crossing of these two species very desirable. 
This is especially so, since in this case there can be no doubt whatever but that the two 
forms interbred are two species each with very pronounced characters. 
As a means of studying more precisely the transmission of characters in crossings Laven 
(1956b) has recently made use of artificially induced mutations, the result of exposure to 
radiation. In one of these mutant forms the terminal segment of the male palps is changed 
into the appearance of a sort of hinged claw and in another the male palps are shortened 
and the terminal joint lost. In other forms changes have been brought about in the wing 
neuration. 
Other means of approach to such problems have been the study of susceptibility of 
hybrid forms to infection by Dirofilaria immitis (Kartman, 1953), the study of trans- 
mission of characters in naturally occurring mutant forms (see under mutants) and chromo- 
somal and cytogenetic studies (see section on chromosomal structure in chapter XXXI). 
A very large field of inquiry is in fact opened up in which research on A&&s aegypti should 
play a part, not only because it is well adapted to laboratory research, but also on account 
of its importance as a disease vector, and so a species regarding which knowledge of its 
possible development of resistance to insecticides is very desirable (see Rozeboom, 1954a). 
GYNANDROMORPHS 
A not uncommon occurrence in mosquitoes, including A. aegypti, are forms showing in 
various degrees mixed sex characters, such forms being termed gynandromorphs. Sex 
determination in insects is not brought about as in mammals through circulating hormones, 
but is the result of the chromosomal condition of individual cells in development leading to 
patches of one sex or another in the sexual mosaic in the same individual (Wigglesworth, 
1942). The effects are very haphazard. Sometimes the two lateral halves of the body are of 
opposite sex, or occasionally partition is transverse, or a body of one sex may have the 
head or genitalia partly or wholly of the opposite sex, or patches of a particular sex may 
be scattered indiscriminately. Besides the appearance of the male and female parts in the 
same individual there may be duplication of the antennae or other parts (Lengerken, 1928). 
Gynandromorphs have been described in a number of species of mosquitoes. A list is given 
by Komp and Bates (1948) and by Bates (1949). Kitzmiller (1953) gives thirty-four examples 
recorded in the literature as given below. For an account of the origin of gynandromorphs 
see Morgan and Bridges (19 19). 
Of the five gynandromorphs of A. aegypti that described by Martini had the head wholly 
male and the apical portion of the abdomen wholly female with some other less noticeable 
parts affected. In the three forms described by Roth and Willis the antennae in all were of 
male character and the abdomen and genitalia female. Other parts were of varied sex 
character. In two cases one wing was shorter than the other, indicating male character. 
In the specimen recorded by Smyly the left side of the head was male and the right female. 
A study of the behaviour of the three forms described by them has been made by Roth 
and Willis. All three forms were indifferent to the human arm and two exposed to females 
made no male response. They behaved like males, however, in that they remained flying 
3 33 CH 
Species 
A2des punctor* 
A2des detritus 
Aedes pullatus 
AL;des abserratus 
AZdes canadensis 
Aedees aegypti 
Culex pipiens 
Culex molestus 
Culex fatigans 
Culex coronator 
Culex salinarius 
Culex nigripalpis 
Culex theileri 
Theobaldia annulata 
Orthopodomyia signifera 
Orthopodomyia Jkscipes 
Haemagogus spegazinnii 
Megarhinus brevipalpis SYSTEMATIC 
Number 
described 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
6 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 Author 
Edwards, 1917 (3); Shute, 1926 (1); Der Brelje, 1923 (1) 
Marshall, 1938 
Felt, 1905 
Felt, 1904 
Carpenter, 1948 
Martini, 1930 (1); Smyly, 1942 (1); Roth and Willis, 1952 (3) 
Marshall, 1938 
Marshall, 1938 (1); Weyer, 1938 (1); Gilchrist and Haldane, 
1947 (3); Gratz, 1954 (1)-i- 
Middlekauf, 1944 
Komp and Bates, 1948 
Roth, 1948 
Rings, 1946 (1); Warren and Hill, 1947 (1) 
Bedford, 1914 
Classey, 1942 
Roth, 1948 
Roth, 1948 
Bates, 1949 
Muspratt, 195 1 
* Formerly often called A. nemorosus or A. meigenensis. 
t Record by Gratz is additional to Kitzmiller’s list. 
backwards and forwards in the cage after the females had settled. Normal males made 
attempts to pair with the gynandromorphs having normal female wings, showing that the 
sound produced by them resembled that of a female. A few attempts were made to pair 
with one gynandromorph that had a slightly shorter wing on one side, but none with the 
other form with a short wing. Tested with tuning forks two were more sensitive than 
females and took to flight. They failed to give seizing response, that is, clinging to the 
cloth of the cage near the source of sound with the wings vibrating rapidly. But they 
gave clasping response, that is, flexing of the abdomen so that the genitalia touched 
the cloth. 
Certain cases where male A. aegypti have been recorded as attempting to suck human 
blood (for example, as described by Howard, Dyar and Knab, 19 12, p. 109) may possibly 
have been gynandromorphs. In such cases it is necessary to distinguish between attempts 
to feed and males attracted by and sucking sweat, a common happening when feeding 
mosquitoes in cages. 
MUTANTS 
Besides gynandromorphs certain changes due to the action of genes lead to forms which 
differ in some particular from the normal species characters. A short account of such gene 
action is given by Wigglesworth in his chapter on growth. The condition has been especially 
studied in certain Lepidoptera and in Drosophila in Diptera. Two modes of action are 
recognised, namely (1) action confined to the cells in which the genes occur as in deter- 
mining the nature of the wing ornamentation in the moth Ephestia; and (2) action in which 
the cells are caused to liberate chemical substances which exert their action at a distance 
and determine the character of other tissues. The latter type of action is responsible for 
the black-eye and red-eye forms of Ephestia and for the vermilion-eye form of Drosophila. 
The only described instance in mosquitoes appears to be the white-eye mutant of Culex 
molestus described by Gilchrist and Haldane. The condition in this case consists in the 
normally dark eyes of the imago being devoid of pigment so that they appear a dull white. 
The strain described by the above authors was bred from four females and ten males with 
34 
VARIETIES, STRAINS, HYBRIDS, ETC. 
white eyes occurring in a cage of several hundred C. molestus. The lack of eye pigment is 
also present in the larva and in the pupa. The white-eye mutants showed normal phototaxis, 
but did not respond to moving shadows as did the normal individuals. This is attributed 
by the authors to the fact that, the ommatidia not being isolated by pigment from one 
another, visual acuity was lost. The affected larvae and pupae, however, gave a well-marked 
shadow response. They also gave response to changes in light intensity, which was con- 
sidered the reason they gave a shadow reaction. It is not stated whether the ocelli were 
without pigment. As these are the functional visual organs in the larva, and possibly even 
in the pupa, it would be of interest to note their condition. 
The authors note that the white eye in C. molestus is a recessive character giving normal 
Mendelian relations and that it is partially linked with sex. 
No mutant forms appear to have been described in &des aegypti. 
(d) GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 
GENERAL FEATURES OF THE DISTRIBUTION 
In giving an account of the distribution of the species note must be taken of the different 
forms now recognised and described under varieties in section (c) of this chapter. It will 
be most convenient, however, to deal first with certain features in the distribution of the 
species as a whole and to give later what is known of the distribution of the three forms. 
It will be evident from what has already been said that in such questions as the limits of 
the distribution of the species, and a number of other features connected with its occur- 
rence, it will be the type form that in the main is being considered and that to a very large 
extent the pale form, var. queenslandensis, is in varying degree associated with this. Only 
in Africa south of the Sahara does the account of the distribution need to take note of a 
distinctive area occupied by one of the forms, the non-human frequenting s.sp. formosus. 
A large number of early records of localities for the species throughout the world are 
given by Theobald (1901-10) and a very complete summary of records with 320 references 
by Kumm (1931). A map of the distribution as known up-to-date is given by Brumpt 
(1936). Among authors giving the distribution for different countries may be mentioned: 
Dyar (1928) for the Americas ; Edwards (1941) for Ethiopian Africa ; Muspratt (1956) for 
South Africa; Mattingly and Knight (1956) for Arabia; Barraud (1928) for India and 
Burma; Reid (1954) and Macdonald (1956) for Malaya; Brug (1926) and Bonne-Wepster 
and Brug (1932) for the Malay Archipelago ; Ferguson (1923) for Australia; and Farner 
et al. (1946) for the Pacific. There are, however, very numerous other authors recording the 
species, some of whom will be found mentioned in the text. Many references to recent 
records will be found in Review of Applied Entomology, ser. B and in reference lists in 
recent papers by Mattingly (1952, 1953), Marks (1954) and Muspratt (1956). 
As with ‘useful plants’ the distribution of AL;des aegypti (except for the form ssp. 
formosus) has no very obvious relation to the usual zoogeographical realms. The species is 
almost the only, if not the only, mosquito that, with human agency, is spread around the 
whole globe. But in spite of this wide zonal diffusion its distribution is very strictly 
limited by latitude and as far as present records go it very rarely occurs beyond latitudes of 
45” N. and 35” S. Altitude is a further modifying circumstance, as also some other factors, 
notably distance from the sea, desert conditions and isolation from human intercourse. 
35 3-2 
SYSTEMATIC . 
THE NORTHERN LIMITS 
In the accompanying map (Fig. 1) are given the northern and southern limits of distribution 
and the relation of these to latitude and the January and July isotherms, respectively for 
the northern and southern hemispheres, of 50” F. (10” C.). The numbers on the map indi- 
cate localities for which furthest north or south records have been made. 
In America A. aegypti has been recorded far more frequently, and further north, in the 
east than in the west. There is, however, a record (Good, 1945) stating that A. aegyptiused 
to occur in British Columbia, but has not been recorded for thirty years. At the present 
Figure 1. Map showing limits of distribution. 
Map of the world showing northern and southern limits of the recorded distribution of Ai;des 
aegypti and isotherms of 10” C. 
The numbers are those given to recorded localities as set out in Tables 1 and 2. 
Figures in brackets in the tables give the numbers in the list of references to geographical 
distribution on pp. 50-2. 
time the most northerly record on the west appears to be Lower California, at most about 
32” N. It is recorded from Tucson, Arizona by Bequaert (1947), who states that it has not 
been recorded from Colorado or Utah. Passing eastwards A. aegypti is recorded from 
Oklahoma (Rozeboom, 1941) where it is, as noted later, evidently near its temperature 
limit. Eastwards of this it occurs in most of the States up to about 40” N. and formerly 
as far north as Boston, 42” 27’ N. 
A. aegypti has been recorded from the Bermudas, the Azores and the Canary Islands. 
In Teneriffe it was common, but was not found by me in Madeira (Christophers, 1929). 
In western Europe the species is mainly restricted to the more southern parts and is not 
normally recorded north of 45” N. There is a record, however, given by Kumm for Brest, 
48” 24’ N. The single record for England is probably a laboratory error as otherwise it has 
36 
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 
Table 1. Recorded northern limits of distribution.* 
North America Europe (cont.) 
1 British Columbia (37), 50” N.t 
2 Lower California (62), 32” N. 
3 Arizona (9), 32” N. 
4 Oklahoma (57), 36” N.1 
5 Missouri (40, 62), 38” N. 
6 Indiana (40, 62), 40” N. 
7 Virginia (40, 62), 38” N. 
8 Maryland (40, 62), 39” N. 
9 Philadelphia (16), 40” N. _t 
10 New York (16), 40” 52’ N.-t 
11 Boston (16), 42” 27’ N. t 19 France (Brest) (42), 48” 24’ N. 
20 France (Dol) (42, 62), 48” 31’ N. 
21 France (Bordeaux) (59), 44” 48’ N. 
22 Italy (Genoa) (42), 44” 25’ N. 
23 Italy (Ravenna) (42), 44” 25’ N. 
24 Bosnia (3), 44” N. 
25 Macedonia (42), 41” N. 
26 Russia (Odessa) (41), 46” 30’ N.$ 
27 Russia (Sukkum) (58), 43” N. 
28 Russia (Baku) (I), 40” 25’ N. 
Atlantic Islands 
12 Bermuda (6), 32” 20’ N. 
13 Azores (62), 38” 35’N. 
14 Canary Islands (18, 47), 28” 40’ N. 
15 Morocco (Tangier) (17), 35 ’ 42’ N. Asia 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 India (Peshawar) (8), 34” N. 
India (Assam) (S), 26” N. 
China (Shanghai) (29), 31” 10’ N. 
China (Amoy) (30), 24” 40’ N. 
Formosa (29, 42), 24” N. 
Japan (Tokyo) (42, 62), 35” 40’ N. 
Japan (Okayama) (42), 34” 22’ N. 
Europe 
16 Portugal (Badajos) (35), 38” N. 
17 Spain (north-west point) (13), 43” N. 
18 Spain (Ebro) (27), 41” N. North Pacific Islands 
36 Wake Island (56), 20” N. 
37 Hawaii (11, 39), 20” N. 
* The figures in brackets refer to authors as given in the list of references on pp. 50-52. The numbers preceding 
the name are those entered on the map. 
t In past times only. 
$ At biological limit. 
never been recorded. In eastern Europe it is again seen at its temperature limit at Odessa 
(Korovitzkyi and Artemenko, 1933). It is recorded from Transcaucasia up to about 
43” N. In Asia its distribution to the north is largely restricted by the Himalayan and 
other mountain chains. Records north of the great chains in the central regions of Asia 
are entirely wanting. Its occurrence in Japan is rather vaguely given by Yamada in his 
revision of the mosquitoes of Japan as limited by the frost line. The main island of Japan 
lies roughly between the January isotherms of 30” F. and 40” F. so that the limit might 
well be shown by the record for Tokyo. In the northern Pacific A. aegypti has recently 
been recorded as newly introduced in Wake Island and it is recorded as present in some of 
the islands of the Hawaii group. 
THE SOUTHERN LIMITS 
Records for the southern limits are given in Table 2. In general the distribution does not 
extend to latitudes as high as those recorded for the northern hemisphere. For South 
America on the west there are relatively few records, the most southerly being for Peru. 
There appear to be no records for Chili. On the east Brumpt’s map is shaded for some 
distance south of Buenos Ayres, possibly to cover a record for Bahia Blanca. In the south 
Atlantic there are the islands of Trinidad, 20” 30’ S., Ascension, 8” S., St Helena, 14” 30’ S., 
Tristan da Cunha, 37” S., and Gough Island, 40” 19’ S., all of which are at latitudes 
compatible with the possible presence of the species. I have not, however, been able to 
find any records. 
37 
SYSTEMATIC 
In the south of the African continent Edwards (1941) shows A. aegypti as recorded from 
every region except Cape Province, South West Territory and Bechuanaland, but in his 
text he notes that specimens are in the British Museum from Grahamstown and Port 
St John. More recently a number of records as given by De Meillon are noted by Mattingly 
(1952) for South-west Africa (Tsumeb, 19” 15’ S., Windhoek, 22” 35’ S., Franzfontein, 
20” 10’ S., Okimbahe, 21” 25’ S., Karabib, 21” 52’ S., and in the interior to the east in 
Bechuanaland, Upington and Kimberley). Still more recently Muspratt (1956) has given 
detailed records with a map for southern Africa showing numerous records along the east 
coast as far as Grahamstown. Inland are many records for the Transvaal, but only a few 
south of this and none at all either coastal or inland in the western half of Cape Province 
where the species would appear not to occur. On the west the most southerly records are 
those in South-west Africa referred to above, all north of 23” S. 
Table 2. Recorded southern limits of distribution.* 
South America 
1 Southern Peru (23), 15” S. 
2 Monte Video (20), 34” 30’ S. 
3 Buenos Aires (13, 42), 34” 30’ S. Australia 
12 Fremantle (61), 32” S. 
13 New South Wales (19, 31, 33, 64), 32” S. 
Africa South Pacific Islands 
4 South-west Africa (22,49), 22” 30’ S. 14 New Caledonia (14, 32, 52, 55), 21” S. 
5 Grahamstown (25), 33” 20’ S. 15 New Hebrides (14, 52, 53), 17” S. 
6 Port St John (25), 31” 30’ S. 16 Fiji (14, 32, 43), 17” S. 
7 Kimberley (49), 29” S. 17 Samoa (14, 15, 32), 14” S. 
18 Cook Islands (14, 21, 46), 20” S. 
Indian Ocean 19 Pitcaim Island (14, 42), 25” S. 
8 Madagascar (25), 20” S. 
9 Comoro Islands (45), 11” 30’ S. 
10 Seychelles (38), 4” S. 
11 Mauritius (42), 20” 30’ S. 
refer to authors as given in the list of references on PP. 50-52. The numbers 
on the map. * The figures in brackets 
the name are those entered preceding 
In the Indian Ocean there are records for the Comoro Islands and Madagascar, the 
Seychelles, Mauritius, the Maldive Islands and the Netherland Indies. I have not found 
records for the Chagos Islands, Cocoa Islands or Christmas Island, though such may have 
been given in recent literature to which in some cases access is difficult. In Australia the 
species has been recorded both on the east and the west almost to the extreme southern 
limits of the continent. It does not appear to have been recorded from Tasmania. In the 
South Pacific are records for some of the islands in a number of the larger groups. * There 
is a record for Pitcairn Island, 25” S. A. aegypti does not appear to occur in New Zealand 
as it has not been found in North Auckland after special search (Miller, 1920). 
TEMPERATURE IN RELATION TO LIMITS OF DISTRIBUTION 
In the main the northern and southern limits of distribution appear to be related to 
temperature. The relation, however, is not altogether a simple one. In America the northern 
limit corresponds fairly well to a January isotherm of 35” F. and a July isotherm of 75” F. 
In Europe, except in the west, it corresponds to a January isotherm of 40” F. and a July 
isotherm of 75” F. Such a winter isotherm would, however, include parts of Great Britain 
Famer et al. (1946), who give maps illustrating * See Backhouse and Heydon (1950) ; Bohart and Ingram (1946) ; 
the distribution of mosquitoes of medical importance in this area. 
38 
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 
and Ireland which are well north of the limit and where only one doubtful record of the 
species has ever been made. For China the figures are 50” F. and 80” F., and for Australia 
for July and January respectively (the winter and summer periods being reversed) 50” F. 
and 70” F. In degrees centigrade the above data are as follows: 
N. America 
Europe 
China 
Mean o c. o c. 
January July 
l-8 23-9 
4-4 23.9 
10.0 26.7 
5.4 24.8 S. America 
Africa 
Australia 
Mean o c. o c. 
January July 
15.6 26-7 
15-6 26.7 
10.0 21.1 
13.7 24.8 
Experimental data in the laboratory as given in a later chapter point to a temperature 
of about 10” C. as that just lethal to the adult and larva. A time of reduction in winter to 
this temperature would on such a basis presumably limit establishment of the species in 
so far as it would be lethal to both adult and larva, even if, as Cossio (1931) notes for 
Uruguay, the species were dependent on passing the winter months in the larval stage. The 
egg, however, has been shown to be much more resistant to low temperature and several 
authors have described the species as over-wintering in the egg stage. Ferguson (1928) 
notes that the species in the southern parts of Queensland and in New South Wales breeds 
only during the warmer months and passes the winter in the egg. Roukhadze (1926) similarly 
says in regard to Georgia (Transcaucasus) that the species oviposits in the autumn and that 
the winter is passed in the egg stage. 
It would not appear, however, that resistance of the egg to cold can be a very important 
asset to the species in greatly extending its area of distribution. For if the temperature is 
not sufficiently high for a sufficient length of time in the summer to allow for at least one 
brood laying eggs the species would still not be established. Korovitzkyi and Artemenko 
(1933) speaking of the summer on the Black Sea coast note that, at the temperature pre- 
vailing, eighteen days elapse between pairing and oviposition and that most females die 
before their eggs mature. Rozeboom (1941) speaking of the over-wintering of A. aegypti 
in Oklahoma considers that there are, towards the limit of distribution, three zones, 
namely (1) a zone in which the temperature allows continuous breeding, (2) a border-line 
zone where the species hibernates as the egg, and (3) a temporary summer zone in which 
the species breeds and spreads in the warm weather but dies out. Viosca (1924) notes that 
in New Orleans no adults were found between January and April inclusive. 
Whether restriction of the species is due to a low winter temperature or to insufficiently 
high and long summer temperature is therefore uncertain. It would appear rather more 
probable that it was insufficient summer temperature that was mainly responsible. That the 
limit should appear to be related to a critical low winter temperature would largely follow 
since the two temperatures are clearly to a considerable extent correlated, a certain degree 
of low winter temperature being probably accompanied by a corresponding low and short 
summer temperature. 
THE EFFECT OF ALTITUDE 
An important factor influencing the prevalence of the species in particular localities and 
even in the major features of the world distribution is altitude. Altitude is clearly respon- 
sible for the southerly position of the northern limit in South Asia, there being no records 
for the species north of the line of the Himalayas and country to the east of this, though 
39 
SYSTEMATIC 
extensive tracts lie well within the latitude of 40”. The highest altitude recorded would 
appear to be that of Mara (1946), for presence of the species on the summit of Mt Bizen, 
Eritrea, at an altitude of 7800 feet. Garnham, Harper and Highton (1946) also found the 
species in the Kaimosi Forest, Kenya, at 6500 feet altitude. Both these records probably 
relate to the wild form, though very similar altitudes could probably be found for the 
normal human associated form, for example Dalhousie, given as a record by Barraud, is 
over 7000 feet. In general, however, an elevation of 6000-8000 feet is likely to limit 
distribution of the species, or even lower levels in temperate latitudes. On Mt Bizen the 
temperature is recorded as ranging from 15.3” C. to 19.7” C., the lower limit being not very 
far from the temperature limiting the species by latitude. Much may depend upon the 
situation not only as regards latitude, but also upon the physical features of an area. Thus 
much of the Transvaal, where Muspratt (1956) gives many altitudes in his records of over 
3000 feet and one of 5900 feet (Johannesburg), though elevated, is a plateau with corre- 
sponding high January temperatures, whilst in steep mountainous country not only 
climatic conditions but those associated with man may be more hostile. 
. 
SOME OTHER FACTORS AFFECTING DISTRIBUTION 
Whilst the extreme limits of distribution of the species have been indicated, it by no means 
follows that the species is necessarily present everywhere within such limits, and other 
conditions than temperature may decide its presence. Thus it is absent or rare in many 
desert areas. Lewis (1947) notes that A. aegypti is rare in the desert-like country north of 
Khartoum where it is scarcely ever found despite careful search. Baque and Kieffer (1923) 
refer to its scarcity in the Sahara; and the absence of records over extensive tracts of desert 
country in the western regions of America already alluded to, as also in the Kalahari 
Desert in Southern Africa, are noticeable features in its distribution. There are extensive 
areas of forest where the species does not occur. Aragao (1935), speaking of jungle yellow 
fever in Brazil, states that A. aegypti is not found in the forest unless brought by the 
inhabitants from the towns, and other authors refer to general acceptance that in the great 
forests of America the species is not found unless introduced. In Africa south of the Sahara 
the species is recorded from primeval forest, but it appears that here it is not the usual 
form, but the s.sp. formosus that is encountered. 
On the other hand are conditions favouring the species. Thus, marked features in its 
distribution are its relative abundance in moist warm climates, its close association with 
coastal conditions and its special prevalence in towns and especially the great sea ports. 
Its prevalence in moist warm climates is in keeping with experience in the laboratory, 
a high humidity being especially favourable to the life and activity of the adult, besides 
providing in the form of rainfall abundant facilities for breeding. In the last respect, 
however, a dry climate and domestic habits that lead to storage of water may also be 
favourable. High humidity is obviously a factor favouring coastal distribution, and in the 
conditions formerly largely present in ships and dhows is a further factor that has favoured 
dispersion. Chandler (1945) notes that when ships offered good breeding places, as they 
did in the past, A. aegypti was found established at places like Philadelphia, New York and 
Boston at present beyond the species area of distribution. 
40 
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 
SPREAD AND ASSOCIATION WITH MAN 
Whilst the influences mentioned have in various degrees played their part in modifying 
distribution and prevalence within the limits imposed by temperature, the one all-important 
cause of the present extended distribution of the species is very clearly its spread by man. 
As a corollary, where man has not introduced the species it may often be absent though 
conditions are favourable. Such areas may cover considerable tracts or may be quite 
small. The species is common in Ceylon, but Senior White (1920) in his mosquito survey of 
a rubber estate in the less frequented eastern part of the island found A. aegypti entirely 
absent, though altitude and temperature conditions were not unfavourable. In an AL;des 
survey of Hog Island, a low-lying island within sight of the city of Bombay, but private and 
secluded and largely covered with dense forest, Afridi (1939) found A. aegypti absent, 
though other species of Acdes were abundant. 
In the Pacific the part played by man in spreading the species is particularly evident. 
Buxton and Hopkins (1927), referring to Samoa, note that the species is abundant in Apia, 
a good harbour with a considerable European community, but has never been found far 
from houses of Europeans and has failed to colonise the forests in spite of suitable breeding 
places. It has been recorded from the Society Islands, Tonga, Hawaii and other island 
groups, but usually only in the more frequented islands in such groups. Recently many 
interesting instances have been recorded of occurrence of the species only after Japanese 
occupation during the last war. Thus Perry (1949) notes that in Treasury Island (British 
Solomons) A. aegypti had not been known up to 1945, but was present at the time of 
his investigation. Rosen, Reeves and Aarons (1948) record the presence of the species 
in Wake Island in 1947, after Japanese occupation, though it had not been present up to 
1941. 
The species would appear also to have become more diffused recently throughout 
Malaya. Macdonald (1956), as a result of a recent survey, notes that the original largely 
coastal distribution of the species has been rapidly vanishing and that, though there are 
still some rural areas, especially inland, where A. aegypti is absent, the species is now widely 
spread throughout the country. 
THE ORIGINAL HOME OF THE SPECIES 
It has been suggested that the original home of A. aegypti was the New World. Dyar 
(1928), however, notes that there are no nearly related species in the American continent, 
but many such in the Old World, especially in Africa, and he considered that it was probably 
the African continent from which the species originated. Recent findings have strengthened 
this view. Not only have numerous species of the same subgenus been recorded from the 
Ethiopian Region (some thirty-seven as against thirty from the Oriental Region, the next 
richest in number, with but few elsewhere), but there are in this region some very closely 
related forms. Furthermore, the species has been found in Africa breeding in forest areas 
independent of man, a very unusual feature elsewhere. If the species originally spread from 
Africa there might well be the general picture of the present distribution. 
This would seem to be an appropriate place to refer to the origin of the distribution of 
A. aegypti in the New World, about which, beyond giving its limits, nothing has so far 
been said. That A. aegypti had a wide distribution in the Americas was evident from the 
41 
SYSTEMATIC 
large amount of work carried out in the early part of the century in the control and elimi- 
nation of the species as the vector of urban yellow fever. Thus its presence throughout the 
southern United States, Central America, the West Indies and parts of Brazil was sufficient 
at one time, as we have seen, to suggest that this was its original home. Yet it seems unlikely 
that the species could have been introduced before the discovery of America and it is 
remarkable that so extensive a spread could have taken place in what must have been 
relatively late historical times. Yet the reasons for thinking so are very strong. It is 
possible that, once introduced, such active dissemination may have been partly at least the 
result of a relatively high level of civilisation with corresponding trade and other activities. 
There might here be a certain irony in such a cause for the species in the fact that this 
carried with it its own Nemesis. For in no part of the world have there been such active 
measures carried out against the species. So much so that this has led to its elimination 
from much of the areas once occupied. * Referring to the present distribution of A. aegypti 
in America Sever0 (1956) gives a map showing areas from which the species has now been 
eradicated and where it is still present. A striking feature of the map are the narrow strips 
of coastal distribution in Central America and some other parts where the species is still 
present. Absence of the species from the vast tracts of forest in Brazil is in remarkable 
contrast to the condition in Ethiopian Africa.? 
DISTRIBUTION OF DIFFERENT FORMS OF THE SPECIES 
A good deal is now known of the distribution of the forms of the species as already 
described. But more information is very desirable, especially with precise identification of 
these forms as encountered in different areas and conditions. Briefly the distribution as at 
present shown by records is as follows: 
For the type form the distribution is as has been given above for the species as a whole, 
except that in Africa south of the Sahara the only form present in the interior, except in 
some special areas, is considered by Mattingly (in lit.) to be the subspecies formosus. 
Otherwise it is the type form, associated to a varying degree with the pale form, var. 
queenslandensis, that represents the species throughout the distributional area. The type 
form appears to be the dominant form in the Indo-Malayan region and in the Pacific, 
though some examples of pale forms have been recorded as given below when dealing 
with this form. In the Mediterranean and on the East African coast the type form occurs 
with a considerable number of records for the pale form. The type form is also recorded 
from the west coast of Africa where in some areas it may show marked variation and 
presence of pale forms as in the species studied at Lagos by Summers Connal. In southern 
Africa it is noted by Muspratt (1956) as present to the limits already given for the species, 
neither var. queenslandensis nor the dark form var. atritarsis Edw. being known except 
from Durban and Zululand where the pale form has been recorded by Mattingly (1953). 
In Australia the type form appears to be the usual form (A. bancrofti of Skuse) with var. 
queenszandensis present in certain localities in Queensland. In America the species exists 
as a mixture of type form and var. queenslandensis, the latter being apparently very abun- 
* See Soper, Wilson, Lima and Antunes (1943) on measures undertaken in Brazil, and many other authors in 
the literature. See also under ‘control’ in chapter IV, section (b). 
t A map of North and South America showing the distribution in relation to control measures is also given in 
the Annual Report of the Director PanAmerican Sanitary Bureau, WHO for 1956 (see in references under 
Soper, 1956). 
42 
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 
dant in the New World, especially in the southern United States and the West Indies 
(Mattingly, in lit.). 
Besides the original locality in south Queensland, var. queenslandensis has been recorded 
from many localities on the east coast of Africa and neighbouring countries. Mattingly 
(1953, p. 60) gives the following list of countries in this area from which the form has been 
recorded : the Sudan, Abyssinia, Eritrea, British Somaliland, Kenya, Tanganyika, 
Zanzibar, Zululand, Natal. The same author records this form from the Seychelles, 
Mauritius, the Aldebara Islands. It has also been recorded from Egypt (see section (a)). 
Lewis (1953) marks a limited coastal area in the Sudan, inland to which the species is 
darker. In Arabia it has been recorded from localities in the Eastern Aden Protectorate 
and in Yemen, Aden, Kedda, Bahrein Island in the Persian Gulf (Mattingly and Knight, 
1956). Mattingly (1953) also records the form from Kameran Island, Amd and Tarim, 
the last-mentioned locality being in the region of the south Arabian desert about 200 miles 
inland. 
Var. queenslandensis is apparently rare in the Indo-Malayan region, but has been 
recorded from Bangalore, South India (Barraud, 1934) ; from Java (Brug); and from 
Singapore (Stanton). It is a recognised Mediterranean form and is recorded from Algeria 
(Edwards, 19 11) ; and from Malaga, Spain (Dyar and Knab, 1910). It is recorded from the 
West Coast of Africa: Lagos (Summers-Connal, 1927) ; Principe Island (Gulf of Guinea), 
Lokoja and Degemma (Mattingly, 1953); and from Bonny (Theobald, 1910). It is stated 
by Muspratt (1956) not to be known from southern Africa except from Durban and 
Zululand. It is apparently very abundant in the New World as already noted. 
The area of distribution of s.sp. formosus is given by Mattingly as confined to Africa 
south of the Sahara. It has been recorded from the forest or bush apart from man and 
breeding in natural breeding places from Kenya (Garnham, Harper and Highton, 1946; 
Van Someren, Teesdale and Furlong, 1955) and from Uganda (Haddow, 1945; Haddow, 
Gillett and Highton, 1946; Haddow and Mahaffy, 1956). Muspratt (1956) records 
A. aegypti as occurring in the Transvaal away from man in the bush and as commonly 
breeding in tree-holes, but does not specify any particular form. A. aegypti appears to 
be unrecorded as a wild or forest form in the New World. 
(e) PALAEONTOLOGICAL RECORD 
Though A. aegypti has not been recorded among fossil mosquitoes it may be of interest, 
as possibly throwing some light on the past history of this species, to note what has been 
recorded regarding fossil Culicidae. A study of what is known of these forms has been 
given by Edwards (1923). Short accounts are also given by Martini (1929) and by Marshall 
(1938). One of the most productive sources of fossils of Nematocera including mosquitoes 
is the famous ‘ insect bed’ of Oligocene age at Gurnet Bay, Isle of Wight, from which a 
large number of the specimens in the British Museum have been obtained. 
True Culicidae are known from the Eocene, one possibly a Culex. Among genera 
recognised by Edwards from the Oligocene are: Agdes, Culex, Taeniorrhynchus; possibly 
Theobaldia, Chaoborus and Dixa. Commenting on his studies Edwards states that prob- 
ably all the main divisions of the Culicinae existed in Mid-Tertiary times as they do today 
with almost identical characters. 
43 
SYSTEMATIC 
The following are fossil species recorded as mosquitoes in the literature with remarks 
by Edwards as to their probable nature: 
JURASSIC (Pm-beck of Dorset or Wiltshire). No certain Culicidae have been recorded. C&x 
fossilis Brody, 1845, is certainly a Tipulid. Rhyphus priscus Brody, 1845, is probably not a 
Rhyphus and may be a Culicid. 
EOCENE (Green River, U.S.) 
Culex damnatorum Scudder, 1890. A true Culicid and may be a Culex. 
Culex winchesteri Cockerell, 1920. Possibly a Culex. 
CuZex proavitus Scudder, 1890. A Phlebotomus or other small Psychodid. 
LOWER OLIGOCENE (Baltic amber) 
Mochlonyx sepultus Meunier, 1902. Correctly given as Mochlonyx. 
Corethra ciliata Meunier, 1904. A true Chaoborus. 
Dixa succinia Meunier, 1906. Differs only in small details from recent species. 
MIDDLE OLIGOCENE (Gurnet Bay, Isle of Wight) 
Aedes protolepis Cockerell. Forty specimens in the British Museum. 
Aedes petrifactellus Cockerell. Male of the above. 
Agdes sp. Cockerell. 
CuZex protorhinus Cockerell. Doubtful if a Culex. Might be Theobaldia. 
CuZex vectensis Edwards, 1923. Probably CuZex in the modern sense. 
Taeniorrhynchus cockerelli Edwards, 1923. Taeniorrhynchus. 
UPPER OLIGOCENE (Aix-en-Provence) 
Culicites depereti Meunier, 1916. Typical culicine mosquito. 
Culicites tertiarius Heyden, 1862. A Chaoborus (Corethra). 
CuZex ceyx Heyden, 1870. Possibly an Aedes. 
Corethra sp. Hope, 1847. (From West Germany.) 
Eriopterites tertiaria Meunier, 1916. A species of Dixa. 
MIOCENE. No culicines recorded. 
QUARTERNARY 
CuZex ciliaris Linn. Bloch. 1776. No locality given. 
CuZex JEavus Gistl, 193 1. Brazil. 
CuZex Zoewii Giebel, 1856. No locality given. 
That mosquitoes have retained generic characters since Oligocene times would seem to 
make any attempt to trace the history of our species with the data available purely a matter 
of conjecture. The only hope would seem to lie in tracing the history of a fauna to which it 
appeared to belong. If in truth the original home of the species was the Ethiopian Region, 
then assuming that A. aegypti or its predecessor species originated as a member of the 
Pliocene fauna of which the Ethiopian fauna is the modern representative it might be 
possible that long before man travelled about the earth this species was present in Europe 
and South-west Asia as part of the Pliocene fauna. This originally extended over Europe 
and parts of Asia, but eventually became the present-day more restricted fauna of the 
Ethiopian Region, though relics may have been left in some areas. 
For a general account of fossil insects see Handlirsh (1908). For an account of tertiary 
land and fauna1 changes see Suess (1924) ; also Zittel (1925) ; Reinig (1937) ; Zeuner (1945, 
1946). For information on zoogeographical realms see Beddard (1895) ; Lydekker (1896) ; 
Heilprin (1907); Newbigin (1913); Lindtrop (1929); De Beauford (1951). Some obser- 
vations relating to the distributional history of subfamily Anophelini are given by the 
present author (Christophers, 1920, 1921, 1933), and some remarks on the evolution of 
44 
PALAEONTOLOGICAL RECORD 
mosquitoes in relation to mammals are given by Ross (1951). A discussion on problems 
of distribution of plants and animals in Africa by a number of authors including a paper 
relating to mosquitoes by Mattingly is here given in the references under the name of Milne 
Redhead et al. (1954). 
REFERENCES 
(a-b) SYNONYMY, SYSTEMATIC POSITION AND IDENTIFICATION 
AUSTEN, E. E. (1912). Nomenclature of S. fasciata. Yell. Fev. Bur. Bull. 2, 3. 
BAISAS, F. E. (1938). Notes on Philippine mosquitoes. Mon. Bull. Bur. HZth P. I. 18, 175-232. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). Fauna of British India. Diptera. Vol. v, Culicidae. Taylor and Francis, 
London. 
BLANCHARD, R. (1905). Les moustiques. Rudeval, Paris. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). The subgenus Stegomyia in Netherland India. 
Geneesk. Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind. Bijblad 2, 35-119. 
DE VILLERS, C. (1789). C. Linnaei entomologia faunae Suecicae descriptionibus aucta. Lugduni. 
Vol. III, pp. 562-6. 
DYAR, H. G. (1920). The earliest name for the yellow fever mosquito (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Insec. Inscit. Menst. 8, 204. 
DYAR, H. G. (1928). The Mosquitoes of the Americas. Carnegie Institute, Washington. 
DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1910). On the identity of CuZex pallidohirta (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 12, 81. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1921). A revision of the mosquitoes of the Palaearctic Region. Bull. Ent. Res. 
12, 325. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1922). Mosquito notes III. Bull. Ent. Res. 13, 82 (Aedes woodi). 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1925). Mosquito notes V. Bull. Ent. Res. 15, 262 (At?des subargenteus). 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1932). Genera insectorum. Brussels. Fast. 194. Fam. Culicidae. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1933). Identity of CuZex aegypti. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 27, 357-60. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region. III, Culicine AduZts and Pupae. 
Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), London. 
FABRICIUS, J. C. See under references, chapter I, section (e). 
GOUGH, L. H. (1914). Preliminary notes on Egyptian mosquitoes. Bull. Ent. Res. 5, 133-5. 
HASSELQUIST, F. See under references, chapter I, section (e). 
HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1936). Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region. Vol. I, Larval Bionomics of 
Mosquitoes and Taxonomy of Culicine Larvae. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), Ed. 2. London. 1951. 
With notes by Mattingly. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912-17). Mosquitoes of North and Central America 
and the West Indies. Vols. I-IV. Carnegie Institute, Washington. 
INGRAM, A. and MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). The early stages of certain West African mosquitoes. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 8, 135-54. 
INTERNATIONAL RULES OF ZOOLOGICAL NOMENCLATURE (1913). Proc. 9th Internat. Congr. ZooZ. 
held at Monaco in 19I3. The rules are given by Wenyon, 1926 (q.v.), and (slightly revised) in 
Proc. 10th Internat. Cong. ZooZ. 1927. ‘Opinions and Declarations’ are published by, and 
on sale at, Office of the Committee, 41 Queen’s Gate, London, S.W. 7. 
IYENGAR, M. 0. T. and MENON, M. A. U. (1955). Mosquitoes of the Maldive Islands. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 46, l-9. With appendix by P. F. Mattingly, pp. 9-10. 
KIRKPATRICK, T. W. (1925). The Mosquitoes of Egypt. Government Press, Cairo. 
KNAB, F. (1916). The earliest name of the yellow fever mosquito. Inset. Znscit. Menst. 4, 59-60. 
KNIGHT, K. L. and HURLBUT, H. S. (1949). The mosquitoes of Ponape Island, Eastern Carolines. 
J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 39, 20-34. 
LINNAEUS, C. (1762). In Hasselquist’s Reise nach Palestina, etc., p. 470. The German transl. 
1757, edited as regards nomenclature by Linnaeus. J. Christian Koppe, Rostok. See also 
under references, chapter I, section (i). 
LUDLOW, C. S. (1911). Philippine mosquitoes. Psyche, 18, 132. 
45 
SYSTEMATIC 
MARKS, E. N. (1954). A review of the Aedes scutellaris subgroup with a study of variation in 
Aedespseudoscutellaris (Theobald). Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.) Ent. 3, no. 10. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1952). The sub-genus Stegomyia (Diptera: Culicidae) in the Ethiopian Region. 
Part I. Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.) Ent. 2, no. 5. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1953). The subgenus Stegomyia (Diptera: Culicidae) in the Ethiopian Region. 
Part II. Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.) Ent. 3, no. 1. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1955). Appendix to Iyengar and Menon, 1955, 4.~. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1957). Genetical aspects of the AL;des aegypti problem. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 51, 392-98 and 52, 5-17. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. and BRUCE-CHWATT, L. J. (1954). Morphology and bionomics of Aedes 
(Stegomyia) pseudoafricanus Chwatt (Diptera: Culicidae) with some notes on the distribution 
of the subgenus Stegomyia in Africa. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 48, 183-93. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. and KNIGHT, K. L. (1956). The mosquitoes of Arabia. Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. 
Hist.) Ent. 4, no. 3. 
MEIGEN, J. W. (1804). Klasstjikation und Beschreibung der Europaischen zwe@igeligen Insekten. 
Braunschweig. Vol. I, p. 4. 
MEIGEN, J. W. (18 18). Systematische Beschreibung der bekannten Europtiischen zwetj%igeligen 
Insekten. Aachen. Vol. I, pp. 1-12. 
MULLER, 0. F. (1764). Fauna insectorum Fridrichdalina. Hafn et Lipsiae. p. 87. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1956). See under (c). 
NATVIG, L. R. (1948). Contributions to the knowledge of the Danish and Fennoscandian 
mosquitoes. Norsk ent. Tidsskr. Suppl. 1, p. 436. 
PALLAS, P. S. (1771). Reisen durch Veisch der Russisch. Reiche. Petersburg. 
PATTON, W. S. (1933). Identity of Culex aegypti L. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 27, 182-4. 
POIRET, L’ABBB (1787). Memoire sur quelques insectes de Barbarie. J. Physique, 30, 245. 
Ross, E. S. and ROBERTS, H. R. (1943). Mosquito Atlas. Part I. Amer. Ent. Sot. Quoted by 
IYENGAR and MENON (1955). 
SEIDELIN, H. (1912). A note on the nomenclature of Stegomyia fasciata. Yell. Fev. Bur. Bull. 
no. 11, 365-6. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901). Monograph of the Culicidae or Mosquitoes. Vol. I, pp. 283, 289, 294. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1907). Monograph of the Culicidae or Mosquitoes. Vol. IV, p. 177. 
THEODOR, 0. (1924). Pupae of some Palestinian Culicides. Bull. Ent. Res. 14, 341-5. 
WENYON, C. M. (1926). Protozoology. Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, London. Vol. II, pp. 1336-49. 
(c) VARIETIES, STRAINS, HYBRIDS, GYNANDROMORPHS AND MUTANTS 
Varieties and strains 
ARRIBALZAGA, E. L. (1891). Dipterologia Argentina. Rev. Mus. La Plats (Culicidae). 
BANKS, C. S. (1906). A list of Philippine Culicidae with descriptions of some new species. Philipp. 
J. Sci. 1, 977-1005. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). See under (a-b). 
BRUG, S. L. (1928). Remarks on the paper by Prof. W. H. Hoffmann. Meded. Volks. Ned.-Ind. 
Foreign ed. 17, 184-5. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1933). Fauna of British India. Diptera. Vol. IV, Tribe Anophelini. Taylor 
and Francis, London. 
DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1910). On the identity of Culex pallidohirta (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 12, 8 1. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1911). The African species of Culex. Bull. Ent. Res. 2, 241-68. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1920). Mosquito notes. Bull. Ent. Res. 10, 129-37. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). See under (a-b). 
GARNHAM, P. C. C., HARPER, J. 0. and HIGHTON, R. B. (1946). The mosquitoes of the Kaimosi 
Forest, Kenya Colony, with special reference to yellow fever. Bull. Ent. Res. 36, 473-96. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955). Behaviour differences in two strains of AL;des aegypti. Nature, Lond., 176, 
124-6. 
46 
REFERENCES 
GILLETT, J. D. and Ross, R. W. (1955). The laboratory transmission of yellow fever by A&&s 
(Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus) from Malaya. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 63-5. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1945a). On the mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. I. Description of 
Bwamba with special reference to the influence of mosquito ecology. Proc. 2001. Sot. Lond. 
115, 1-13. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1945b). On the mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. II. Biting activity with 
special reference to the influence of microclimate. Bull. Ent. Res. 36, 33-73. 
HADDOW, A. J., GILLETT, J. D. and HIGHTON, R. B. (1947). On the mosquitoes of Bwamba 
County, Uganda. V. Vertical distribution and biting cycle of mosquitoes in rain forest. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 37, 301-30. 
HADDOW, A. J. and MAHAFFY, A. F. (1949). On the mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. 
VII. Intensive catching on tree platforms with further observations on A$des (Stegomyia) 
africanus Theobald. Bull. Ent. Res. 40, 169-78. 
HILL, G. F. (1921). Notes on some unusual breeding places of Stegomyia fasciata in Australia. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 15, 91-2. 
HINDLE, E. (1929). The experimental study of yellow fever. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 22, 
405-30. 
KARTMAN, L. (1953). Factors influencing infection of the mosquito with DiroJiZaria immitis 
(Leidy, 1956). Exp. Parasit. 2, 27-78. 
LEGENDRE, J. (1927). Races de Stegomyia fasciata et fikvre jaune. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 185, 
1224-6. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1947). Mosquitoes in relation to yellow fever in the Sudan. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, 
543-66. 
MACDONALD, W. W. (1956). Acides aegypti in Malaya. I. Distribution and dispersal. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 50, 385-98. 
MATHIS, M. (1934). Biologie cornparke en conditions exp&imentales de quatre souches du 
moustique de la fikvre jaune. C.R. Sot. BioZ. 117, 878-80. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1952, 1953). See under (a-b). 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1956). Species hybrids in mosquitoes. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Land. 108, 
21-36. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1957). See under (a-b). 
MATTINGLY, P. F. and KNIGHT, K. L. (1956). See under (a-b). 
MUSPRATT, J. (1956). The Stegomyia mosquitoes of South Africa and some neighbouring terri- 
tories. Mem. Ent. Sot. S. Afr. no. 4. 
REID, J. A. (1954). A preliminary Aedes aegypti survey. Med. J, Malaya, 9, 161-8. 
ROBINEAU-DESVOIDY, J. B. (1827). Essai sur la tribu des culicides. Mein. Sot. Hist. Nat. Paris, 
3, 390-416. 
ROUBAUD, E., COLAS-BELCOUR, J., TOUMANOFF, C. and TREILLARD, M. (1936). Recherches sur la 
transmission de Dirofilaria immitis Leidy. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 29, 111 l-20. 
SHIDRAWI, G. R. (1955). Hybridization of Agdes aegypti and Aedes aegypti var. queenslandensis. 
Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 49, 196. 
SKUSE, F. A. A. (1888). Diptera of Australia. Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. (2), 3, 1740. 
STANTON, A. T. (1920). Mosquitoes of the Far Eastern Ports. BUZZ. Ent. Res. 10, 340. 
SUMMERS CONNAL, S. L. M. (1927). On the variations occurring in AEdes argenteus Poiret in Lagos, 
Nigeria. Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 5-l 1. 
TEESDALE, C. (1955). Studies on the bionomics of Aedes aegypti L. in its natural habitats in a 
coastal region of Kenya. BUZZ. Ent. Res. 40, 71 l-42. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901-10). Monograph of the Culicidae: 1901,1,297 (var. Zuciensis; var. queens- 
Zandensis); 1903, 3, 144; 1910, 5, 159. 
VAN SOMEREN, E. C. C., TEESDALE, C. and FURLONG, M. (1955). The mosquitoes of the Kenya 
coast: records of occurrence, behaviour and habitat. Bull. Ent. Res. 46, 463-93. 
VAN SOMEREN, G. R. C. (1943). Notes on the mosquitoes of British Somaliland. Bull. Ent. Res. 
34, 323-8. 
WALKER, F. (1848). List of Species in the British Museum, London (formosus). 
47 
SYSTEMATIC 
Hybrids 
BARR, A. R. and KARTMAN, L. (195 1). Biometrical notes on the hybridization of Culexpipiens L. 
and C. quinquefasciatus Say. J. Parasit. 37, 419-20. 
BONNET, D. D. (1950). The hybridization of Ai;des aegypti and Acdes albopictus in Hawaii. Proc. 
Hawaii Ent. Sot. 14, 35-9. 
CALLOT, J. (1947). l?tudes sur quelques souches de Culexpipiens (sensu lato) et sur leurs hybrides. 
Ann. Parasit. Hum. Comp. 22, 380-93. 
CALLOT, J. (1954). Le rapport trompe/palpes des biotypes du complexe Culex pipiens et leurs 
hybrides. Ann. Parasit. Hum. Comp. 29, 13 l-4. 
DE BUCK, A. (1942). Kreuzungsversuche mit Stegomyia fasciata Fabricius und S. albopictus 
Skuse. 2. angew. Ent. 29, 309-12. 
DOWNS, W. G. and BAKER, H. H. (1949). Experiments in crossing ALides (Stegomyia) aegypti L. 
and AL;des (Stegomyia) albopictus Skuse. Science, 109, 200-l. 
HOANG-TICH-TRY (1939). Essai de croisement de Stegomyia albopicta et S. fasciata en espkce 
restreint. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 32, 511-13. 
KARTMAN, L. (1953). Factors influencing infection of the mosquito with DiroJiZaria immitis 
(Leidy, 1856). Exp. Parasitol. 2, 27-78. 
KITZMILLER, J. B. (1953). Mosquito genetics and cytogenetics. Rev. Bras. MaZarioZ. 5, 285-359. 
KNIGHT, K. L. (1953). Hybridization experiments with CuZex pipiens and C. quinquefasciatus 
(Diptera: Culicidae). Mosquito News, 13, 110-15. 
KNIGHT, K. L. and ABDEL MALEK, A. A. (1951). A morphological and biological study of CuZex 
pipiens in the Cairo area of Egypt. Bull. Sot. Fouad Ier. Ent. 35, 175-85. 
LAVEN, H. (1951). Crossing experiments with CuZex strains. Evolution, 5, 370-5. 
LAVEN, H. (1953). Reziprok unterschiedliche Kreuzbarkeit von Stechmiicken (Culicidae) und 
ihre Deutung als plasmatische Vererbung. 2. indukt. Abstamm.- u. VererbLehre, 85, 118-36. 
LAVEN, H. (1955). Erbliche intersexualittit bei CuZex pipiens. Naturwissenschaften, 42, 517. 
LAVEN, H. (1956a). Cytoplasmic inheritance in Culex. Nature, Lond., 177, 141-2. 
LAVEN, H. (19563). X-ray induced mutations in mosquitoes. Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. (A), 31, 
17-19. 
LAVEN, H. and KITZMILLER, J. B. (1954). Kreuzungsversuche zwischen europgischen und ameri- 
kanischen Formen des Culex-pipiens-complexes. 2. Tropenmed. u. Parasit. 5, 317-23. 
MACGILCHRIST, A. C. (1913). Stegomyia survey, Port of Calcutta. Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. MaZ. 
Comm., Madras, 1912, pp. 193-6. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. London. 
MARSHALL, J. F. and STALEY, I. (1937). Some notes regarding the morphological and biological 
differentiation of CuZex pipiens Linnaeus and CuZex molestus Forskal (Diptera : Culicidae). 
Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Land. (A), 12, 17-26. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1956). Species hybrids in mosquitoes. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 108, part 2, 
21-36. 
PERRY, W. J. (1950). Biological and cross-breeding studies on A?des hebrideus and Atides perno- 
tatus. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 43, 123-36. 
ROZEBOOM, L. E. (1954a). The genetic relationships of Acdes pseudoscutellaris Theobald and 
A. polynesiensis Marks (Diptera: Culicidae). Amer. J. Hyg. 60, 117-34. 
ROZEBOOM, L. E. (1954b). Hybridization among mosquitoes and its possible relation to the 
problem of insecticide resistance. J. Econ. Ent. 47, 383-7. 
SMITH-WHITE, S. (1950). A note on non-reciprocal fertility in matings between subspecies of 
mosquitoes. Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 75, 279-81. 
TATE, P. and VINCENT, M. (1936). The biology of autogenous and anautogenous races of CuZex 
pipiens L. (Diptera : Culicidae). Parasitology, 28, 115-45. 
TOUMANOFF, C. (1937). Essais prkliminaires d’intercroisement de St. albopicta Skuse avec St. 
argenteus Poiret (S. fasciata Theobald). Bull. Sot. M&d. Chir. Indochine, 15, 964-70. 
TOUMANOFF, C. (1938). Nouveaux faits au sujet de l’intercroisement de St. albopicta Skuse avec 
St. argentea s. fasciata Theob. Rev. M&d. Franc. Extr. Orient. 17, 365-8. 
48 
REFERENCES 
TOUMANOFF, C. (1939). Les races geographiques de St. fasciata et St. albopicta et leur inter- 
croisement. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 32, 505-9. 
TOUMANOFF, C. (1950). L’intercroisement de 1’AfUes (Stegomyia) aegypti L. et Ad;des (Stegomyia) 
albopictus Skuse. Observations sur la mortalite des generations hybrides F, et F, de ces 
insectes. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 43, 234-40. 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1949). A note on experimental crossing of Aedes (Stegomyia) scutellaris 
scutellaris Walker and Aedes (Stegomyia) scutellaris katherinensis Woodhill (Diptera: 
Culicidae). Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 74, 224-6. 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1950). Further notes on experimental crossing within the Aedes scutellaris 
group of species (Diptera: Culicidae). Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 75, 251-3. 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1954). Experimental crossing of Aedes (Stegomyia) pseudoscutellaris Theobald 
and Aedes (Stegomyia)polynesiensis Marks (Diptera: Culicidae). Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 79, 
19-20. 
Gynandromorphs and mutants 
BATES, M. (1949). The Natural History of Mosquitoes. Macmillan and Co., New York. 
BEDFORD, G. A. H. (1914). A curious mosquito. Trans. R. Sot. S. Afr. 4, 143. 
CARPENTER, S. J. (1948). Gynandromorphism in Aedes canadensis. J. Econ. Ent. 41, 522-3. 
CLASSEY, E. W. (1942). Gynandromorphism in Theobaldia annulata Schrank (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Entomologist, 75, 18 1. 
DER BRELJE, R. VON (1923). Ein Fall von Zwitterbildung bei Ai;des meigenensis. Arch. mikr. 
Anat. 100, 317-43. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1917). Notes on Culicidae with descriptions of new species. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 
201-29. 
FELT, E. P. (1904). Mosquitoes or Culicidae of New York State. Bull. N.Y. State Mus. 79, 
241-400. 
FELT, E. P. (1905). Studies in Culicidae. Bull. N. Y. State Mus. 97, 442-97. 
GILCHRIST, E. M. and HALDANE, J. B. S. (1947). Sex linkage and sex determination in a mosquito, 
Culex molestus. Hereditas, 33, 175-90. 
GRATZ, M. G. (1954). A gynandromorph of Culexpipiens molestus (Forsk.). Mosquito News, 14, 
22-3. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912). See under references, chapter I, section (f), 
p. 109. 
KITZMILLER, J. B. (1953). See under Hybrids. 
KOMP, W. H. W. and BATES, M. (1948). Notes on two mosquito gynandromorphs from Colombia 
(Diptera: Culicidae). Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 50, 204-6. 
LENGERKEN, J. (1928). uber die Entstehung bilateral-symmetrischer Insekten-gynander aus 
verschmolzenen Eiern. Biol. Zbl. 48, 475-509. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). See under Hybrids. 
MARTINI, E. (1930). Culicidae. In Lindner’s Die Fliegen der Palaearktischen Region. Stuttgart. 
Parts 11 and 12, p. 248. 
MIDDLEKAUFF, W. W. (1944). Gynandromorphism in recently collected mosquitoes. J. Econ. 
Ent. 37, 297. 
MORGAN, T. H. and BRIDGES, C. B. (19 19). The Origin of Gynandromorphs. Publications Carnegie 
Institute, no. 278. Washington. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1951). A gynandromorph of a predatory mosquito. J. Ent. Sot. S. Afr. 14, 24-5. 
RINGS, R. W. (1946). Gynandromorphism in Culex nigripalpis. J. Econ. Ent. 39, 415. 
ROTH, L. W. (1948). Mosquito gynandromorphs. Mosquito News, 8, 168-74. 
ROTH, L. W. and WILLIS, E. R. (1952). Notes on three gynandromorphs of Aedes aegypti. Proc. 
Ent. Sot. Wash. 54, 189-93. 
SHUTE, P. G. (1926). Intersexual forms of Ochlerotatus punctor Kirby var. meigenensis. Ento- 
mologist, 59, 12-13. 
SMYLY, W. J. P. (1942). A gynandromorph of Aedes aegypti L. (Stegomyia fasciata). Diptera. 
Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Land. 92, 111-12. 
4 49 c H 
SYSTEMATIC 
WARREN, M. and HILL, S. 0. (1947). Gynandromorphism in mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 40, 139. 
WEYER, F. (1938). Ein Zwitter von Culex pipiens. Zool. Anz. 123, 184-92. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). Principles of insect physiology. Ed. 2. Methuen and Co., London. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(1% 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) (See also subsequent editions.) 
(d) GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 
ACHUNDOW, J. (1932). Zur Frage der Biologie und das Verkommen von Stegomyia fasciata 
in Baku (Aserbeidschan U.S.S.R.). Arch. Schifi.- u. Tropen-Hyg. 36, 31-3. 
AFRIDI, M. K. (1939). Ai;des survey of Hog Island. J. Malar. Inst. India, 2, 113-14. 
APFELBECK,~. (1925). Recherches et observations sur les arthropodes pathogknes de l’homme 
et des animaux. Edit. Inspect. Minist. Sante’ Publ. Sarajevo, no. 17: abstract in Rev. Appl. 
Ent. 16, 180. 
ARAGAO, DE B. H. (1935). Mosquitoes and yellow fever virus. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 34, 
565-8 1. 
BACKHOUSE, T. C. and HEYDON, G. A. M. (1950). Filariasis in Melanesia: observations at 
Rabaul relating to incidence and vectors. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 44, 291-300. 
BALFOUR, A. (1928). Health lessons from Bermuda. Brit. Med. J. 1, 447-8. 
BAQUE, B. and KIEFFER, J. J. (1923). Existence de Stegomyia fasciata au Sahara B 500 kilo- 
metres de la c6te MkditerranCenne. Arch. Inst. Pasteur Afr. Nord, 3, 169-71. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1928). The distribution of Stegomyia fasciata in India with remarks on 
dengue and yellow fever. Ind. J. Med. Res. 16, 377-88. 
BEQUAERT, J. (1947). Acdes aegypti (Linnaeus), the yellow fever mosquito in Arizona. Bull. 
Brooklyn Ent. Sot. 41, 157. 
BOHART, R. M. and INGRAM, R. L. (1946). Mosquitoes of Okinawa and islands in the Central 
Pacific. Nav. Med. Bull. Wash. p. 1055. Wash., D.C. 
BONNET, D. D. (1947). The distribution of mosquitoes breeding by type of container in 
Honolulu, T.H. Proc. Hawaii Ent. Sot. 13, 43-9. 
BRUG, S. L. (1926). The geographical distribution of mosquitoes in the Malayan Archi- 
pelago. Meded. Yolks. Ned.-Ind. (foreign ed.), no. 4, pp. 471-86. 
BRUMPT, E. (1936). Pre’cis de Parasitologic. Masson et Cie, Paris. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1927). Researches in Polynesia and Melanesia. 
Parts I-IV. Mem. Lond. Sch. Hyg. Trop. Med. Mem. no. 1. 
BYRD, E. E., ST AMANT and BROMBERG, L. (1945). Studies in filariasis in the Samoan area. 
Nav. Med. Bull., Wash., 44, l-20. 
CHANDLER, A. C. (1945). Factors influencing the uneven distribution of AFdes aegypti in 
Texas cities. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 25, 145-9. 
CHARRIER, H. (1924). Le Stegomyia fasciata dans la rCgion de Tanger (Maroc). Bull. Sot. 
Path. Exot. 17, 137-42. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1929). Note on a collection of Anopheline and Culicine mosquitoes 
fi-om Madeira and the Canary Islands. Ind. J. Med. Res. 17, 5 18-30. 
CLELAND, J. B. (1928). Dengue fever in Australia. Rev. Prat. Mal. Pays Chauds, 8, 509-14. 
COSSIO, V. (1931). Observaciones sobre al Ai;des aegypti (Stegomyia) mosquito de la febbre 
amarilla en Montevideo. Bol. Cons. Nat. Hyg. Publ. 23, 1664. Abstract in Bull. Inst. Pasteur, 
29, 895. 
DAVIS, T. R. A. (1949). Filariasis control in the Cook Islands. N.Z. Med. J. 48, 262-70. 
DE MEILLON, B. (1940). Report on the Department of Entomology. Rep. S. Afr. Inst. Med. 
Res. for 1939, pp. 30-7. Abstract in Rev. App. Ent. 28, 211. 
DUNN, L. H. (1923). Prevalence of the yellow fever mosquito Aedes calopus in the Southern 
parts of Peru. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 3, l-8. 
(24) DYAR, H. G. (1928). The Mosquitoes of the Americas. Carnegie Institute, Washington. 
(25) EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region. Vol. III, Culicine Adults and 
Pupae. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), London. 
(26) EKBLOM, T. (1929). Some observations on Stegomyia fasciata during a visit to Greece in the 
autumn of 1928. Acta Med. Stand. 70, 505-18. 
50 
(27) 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 
(31) 
(32) 
(33) 
(34) 
(35) 
(36) 
(37) 
(38) 
(39) 
(40) 
(41) 
(42) 
(43) 
(44) 
(45) 
(46) ELVIRA, J. (1930). Nota a cerca de 10s Culicidos encontrados en la cuenca de1 Ebro. Med. 
Paisos Calidos, 3, 63. 
FARNER, D. S., DICKS, R. J., SWEET, G., ISENHOUR, L. and HSIAS, T. Y. (1946). Distribution 
of mosquitoes of medical importance in the Pacific area. Nav. Med. Bull., Wash., p. 983. 
Wash., D.C. 
FAUST, E. C. (1926). A preliminary check list of the mosquitoes of the Sini-Japanese areas. 
China Med. J. 40, 142-3. 
FENG, LAN-CHOU (1933). Household mosquitoes and human filariasis in Amoy. China Med. 
J. 47, 168-78. 
FERGUSON, E. W. (1923). On the distribution of insects capable of carrying disease in 
Eastern Australia. Med. J. Amt. 2, 339. 
FERGUSON, E. W. (1926). On the distribution of insects capable of carrying disease in 
Eastern Australia. Proc. Pan-Pactjic Sci. Congr. Australia 1923, 2, 1477-86. 
FERGUSON, E. W. (1928). Dengue fever: the 1925-6 outbreak in New South Wales. Rep. 
Direct. Publ. Hlth N.S. W. I926, pp. 154-64. 
GARNHAM, P. C. C., HARPER, G. A. and HIGHTON, R. B. (1946). The mosquitoes of the 
Kaimosi forest, Kenya Colony, with special reference to yellow fever. Bull. Ent. Res. 36, 
473-96. 
GIL COLLADO, J. (1930). Datos actuales sobre la distribution geographica de 10s Culicidos 
Espanioles. Eos, 6, 329-47. 
GOLDBERGER, J. (1907). Yellow fever. Etiology, symptoms and diagnosis. Yell. Fev. Inst. 
Bull. no. 16. 
GOOD, N. E. (1945). A list of mosquitoes of the district of Columbia. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 
47, 168-79. 
HARPER, J. 0. (1947). A mosquito survey of Mahe, Seychelles. E. Afr. Med. J. 24, 
25-9. 
HOFFMAN, F. L. (1916). The Sanitary Progress and Sanitary Statistics of Hawaii. Prudential 
Press, Newark, N.Y. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1905). Concerning the geographic distribution of the yellow fever mosquito. 
Suppl. to Publ. Hlth Rep. 18, no. 46, ed. 2. 
KOROVITZKYI, L. K. and ARTEMENKO, V. D. (1933). Zur Biologie des Aedes aegypti. Msg. 
Parasit., Lening. 2, 400-6. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 22, 78. 
KUMM, H. W. (1931). The geographical distribution of the yellow fever vectors. Amer. J. 
Hyg. Monogr. Ser. no. 12, pp. 5-45. 
LEVER, R. J. A. W. (1946). Entomological notes. Agric. J. Fiji, 17, 9-15. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1947). Mosquitoes in relation to yellow fever in the Sudan. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, 
543-66. 
MCCARTHY, D. D. and WILSON, D. B. (1948). Dengue in East African Command. Incidence 
in relation to Aedes prevalence and some clinical features. Trans. R. Sot. Trap. Med. Hyg. 
42, 83-8. 
MCKENZIE, A. (1925). Observations on filariasis, yaws and intestinal helminthic infections 
in the Cook Islands with notes on the breeding habits of Stegomyia scutellaris. Trans. R. Sot. 
Trap. Med. Hyg. 19, 138-49. 
(47) MACQUART, J. (1839). In Webb and Berthelot: Histoire naturelle des Canaries, p. 99. 
(48) MARA, L. (1946). Considerations sul rinvenimento dell’ Aedes aegypti L. (Diptera: Aedinae) 
ad altitudini d’accazione e brevi note sulla fauna de1 M. Bizen (Eritrea A.O.). Boll. Sot. Ital. 
Med. (Sez. Eritrea), 5, 189-98. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 30, 40. 
(49) MATTINGLY, P. F. (1952, 1953, 1957). See under (a-b). 
(50) MILLER, D. (1920). Report on the Mosquito Investigations Carried out in the North Auckland 
Peninsula of New Zealand during the Summer of 1918-19. New Zealand Dept. Hlth. 
Publ. 3. REFERENCES 
(51) NEWTON, W. L., WRIGHT, W. H. and PRATT, I. (1945). Experiments to determine potential 
mosquito vectors of Wucheria bancrofti in the continental United States. Amer. J. Trap. 
Med. 25, 253-61. 
SYSTEMATIC 
(52) OMAN, P. W. and CHRISTENSEN, L. D. (1947). Malaria and other insect-borne diseases in the 
South Pacific Campaign 1942-1945. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 27, 91-117. 
(53) PERRY, W. J. (1948). The dengue vector in New Caledonia, the New Hebrides and the 
Solomon Islands. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 28, 253-9. 
(54) PERRY, W. J. (1949). The mosquitoes and mosquito-borne diseases of the Treasury Islands 
(British Solomon Islands). Amer. J. Trop. Med. 29, 747-58. 
(55) PERRY, W. J. (1950). The mosquitoes and mosquito-borne diseases in New Caledonia, an 
historic account, 1888-1946. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 30, 103-14. 
(56) ROSEN, L., REEVES, W. C. and AARONS, T. (1948). AL;des aegypti in Wake Island. Proc. 
Hawaii Ent. Sot. 13, 255-6. 
(57) ROZEBOOM, L. E. (1941). The over-wintering of Aedes aegypti L. in Stillwater, Oklahoma. 
Proc. Okla. Acad. Sci. 19, 81-2. 
(58) ROUKHADZB, N. (1926). L’hibernation des Anopheles et des Stegomyias en Abasie (Georgie 
Maritime). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 19, 480-7. 
(59) SEGUY, E. (1923). Histoire naturelle des moustiques de France. Paul le Chevalier, Paris. 
(60) SENIOR WHITE, R. (1920). A survey of the Culicidae of a rubber estate. Ind. J. Med. Res. 8, 
304-25. 
(61) TAYLOR, F. H. (1942). Contributions to a knowledge of Australian Culicidae, no. v. Proc. 
Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 67, 277-8. 
(62) THEOBALD, F. V. (1901-10). Monograph of the Culicidae of the World. Vols. I-V. Brit. Mus. 
(Nat. Hist.), London. 
(63) VIOSCA, P. (1924). A bionomical study of the mosquitoes of New Orleans and S.E. Louisiana. 
Dep. Bd Hlth Orleans Parish, 1924, 35-52. 
(64) WOODHILL, A. R. (1949). Observations on the comparative survival of various stages of 
Ai;des (Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus) at varying temperatures and humidities. Proc. Linn. 
Sot. N.S. W. 73, 413-18. 
(65) YAMADA, S. (1925). A revision of the adult anopheline mosquitoes of Japan. Sci. Rep. Gov. 
Inst. Infect. Dis. 3, 215-41. 
Additional references to section (d) 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). See under (a-b). 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See under (a-b). 
DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1910). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1911). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1945). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
HADDOW, A. J., GILLETT, J. D. and HIGHTON, R. B. (1947). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
HADDOW, A. J. and MAHAFFY, A. F. (1949). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1953). The Stegomyia mosquitoes of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 47, 51-61. 
MACDONALD, W. W. (1956). AL;des aegypti in Malaya. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 385-98. 
MARKS, E. N. (1954). See under (a-b). 
MATTINGLY, P. F. and KNIGHT, K. L. (1956). See under (a-b). 
MUSPRATT, J. (1956). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
REID, J. A. (1954). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
SEVERO, 0. P. (1956). Eradication of the At;des aegypti mosquito from the Americas. Mosquito 
News, 16, 115-21. 
SOPER, F. L. (1956). Annual Report of the Director Pan-American Sanitary Bureau, WHO 
Washington, D.C. Map, p. 42. 
SOPER, F. L., WILSON, D. B., LIMA, S. and ANTUNES, W. SA. (1943). The Organisation of Permanent 
Nation- Wide Anti-Acdes aegypti Measures in Brazil. Rockefeller Foundation, New York. 
STANTON, A. T. (1920). See under (c), Varieties and strains. * 
SUMMERS CONNAL, S. L. M. (1927). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
VAN SOMEREN, E. C. C. et al. (1955). See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
52 
REFERENCES 
(e) PALAEONTOLOGICAL RECORD 
BEDDARD, F. E. (1895). A Text-book of Zoogeography. Cambridge Univ. Press. 
BRODIE, P. B. (1845). A History of the Fossil Insects in the Secondary Rocks of England. Van 
Voorst, London, p. 34. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1920). A summary of recent observations upon the Anophelini of the 
Middle East. Ind. J. Med. Res. 7, 7 10-l 6. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1921). The geographical distribution of the Anophelini. Trans. 4th Congr. 
F.E.A.T.M. 1, 421-30. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1933). Pp. 357-59. See under (c), Varieties and strains. 
DE BEAUFORD, L. F. (1951). Zoogeography of the Land and Inland Waters. London. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1923). Oligocene mosquitoes in the British Museum, with a summary of our 
present knowledge concerning fossil Culicidae. Quart. J. Geol. Sot. Lond. 79, 139-55. 
HANDLIRSCH, A. (1908). Die fossilen Insekten. W. Engelmann, Leipzig. 
HEILPRIN, A. (1907). The Geographical and Geological Distribution of Animals. London. 
LINDTROP, G. T. (1929). Russ. J. Trop. Med. 7, 153-191 (in Russian). 
LYDEKKER, R. (1896). A Geographical History of Mammals. Cambridge Univ. Press. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. London. 
MARTINI, E. (1929). Lehrbuch der medizinische Entomologie. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1957). See under (a-b). 
MILNE REDHEAD, E. et al. (1954). Discussion on the problem of distribution of plants and animals 
in Africa. (Different authors.) Proc. Linn. Sot. Lond. 165, 24-74. 
NEWBIGIN, M. L. (1913). Animal Geography. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
REINIG, W. F. (1937). Die Holarktis. Jena. 
Ross, H. H. (1951). Conflict with Culex. Mosquito News, 11, 128-32. 
SUESS, E. (1924). The Face of the Earth. Oxford Univ. Press. Vol. IV, pp. 637-73. 
ZEUNER, F. E. (1945). The Pleistocene Period, its Climate, Chronology and Fauna1 Succession. 
Ray Society, London. 
ZEUNER, F. E. (1946). Dating the Past. London. 
ZITTEL, A. A. VON (1925). A Text-book of Palaeontology. Macmillan and Co., London. Vol. III, 
pp. 290-3 10. 
53 
III 
BIONOMICAL 
(a) LIFE HISTORY 
The bionomics of A&!es aegypti will be studied in later chapters in detail in relation to the 
different stages of development. It seems desirable, however, at this stage to say something 
regarding its life cycle as a whole and on the conditions relative to this in nature. 
From the egg, hatching or eclosion gives rise to the first instar larva. This is followed by 
three successive moults or ecdyses, leading to the respective stages of second, third and 
fourth instar larva. A fourth ecdysis, or pupation, gives rise to the pupa, and a final casting 
of the pupal skin, emergence, results in the appearance of the imago, in mosquitoes commonly 
spoken of as the adult, male or female. To complete the life cycle there is pairing of the 
sexes, copulation, leading to fertilisation of the female, followed in due course, if a sufficient 
blood meal has been obtained, by oviposition. 
Continued propagation of the species is dependent upon: (1) the obtaining of a blood 
meal by the female, without which eggs are not formed; (2) the presence of water suitable 
for larval life; (3) a temperature that will permit the species to exhibit the activities necessary 
to propagate. For the adult, the degree of activity and duration of life is largely dependent 
on a suitable humidity, as well as upon shelter and, to judge from experience in the labora- 
tory, upon access to water to drink, for the species soon dies in captivity, even in a rela- 
tively moist atmosphere, if it is unable to drink. For the larva there must exist breeding 
places where the larva can obtain food under conditions for which it is adapted, that is, 
neither very foul water, in which the species is rarely found, nor open natural water, for 
which some mosquitoes are adapted, * but not A. aegypti. The larva must also find safety 
from natural enemies to which, with its soft and conspicuous body, it has been shown to 
be very susceptible, so much so that as noted later a measure in its control has been 
the use of small larvivorous fish and other enemies including a voracious species of 
cannibal mosquito larva. 
Conditions favourable in all these respects are normally found in the neighbourhood of 
man and especially in man’s domestic arrangements. Only in the forest form as described 
in a previous chapter is the species usually found living apart from such conditions. And 
whilst Anopheles is very commonly the form found associated with man in his most 
primitive state living near jungle and swamp, ACdes aegypti is seen as a rule in greatest 
profusion in the dwellings of man at a higher level of civilisation and very conspicuously 
of man as a town dweller. Here, with the domestic water pot, the cistern, the anti-formica, 
the flower vase and shaded rooms with cupboards and hanging equipment and with man 
to feed upon, AEdes aegypti as usually encountered finds a very suitable locus. Also at the 
dock side and water front of teeming harbours in moist and rainy tropical climates, with 
miscellaneous collections of water in machinery, country boats and even in the old days 
* Such 
289. mosquitoes commonly have an especially large pharynx with corresponding large head. See chapter XIII, 
P. 
54 
LIFE HISTORY 
in ships, whereby it is spread to other ports and harbours, the species obtains conditions 
optimal for its proliferation. It does not find conditions so suitable where communities 
are well housed with permanent water supply and good drainage system and tidier house 
habits. 
Spread of the species is ensured by a variety of means: by transport of the adult, or of 
the larva, or by a method that is not often considered, but may well happen, the transport 
of eggs characteristically cemented as described later on the sides of pots or other 
receptacles. 
Establishment of the species in a new area would not seem to need any very special 
requirements other than introduction. But some efforts to introduce the species experi- 
mentally in Malaya described by Macdonald (1956) were not so successful as expected, 
and it is possible that under such conditions dispersion by too great diffusion of individuals 
may be an adverse influence. 
Of climatic conditions it is unlikely that any natural climate would through high 
temperature alone limit existence of the species. Creac’h (1947) records the species in the 
Lake Chad area where the temperature from March to May regularly exceeds 40” C. In 
the hot dry season in the Punjab and Rajputana the air temperature for many hours in the 
day may be 115” F. (46” C.), but the species is not eliminated. Combined, as it usually is 
with aridity, such a climate is not favourable, as are moist humid conditions, but within 
dwellings the species by choice of resting-place for the adult may escape the full effect, 
for example, by its common habit of resting on porous water chatties or damp places. The 
larva, too, living in receptacles (often porous) is not exposed to the full temperature effect. 
Low temperature may, however, severely limit the activity and even existence of the 
species as has been shown in regard to its geographical distribution. The actual limiting 
temperature for activity of the adult appears to be round about 15” C. Charrier (1924), in 
Morocco, notes that at 18” C. man is freely attacked and mating observed morning and 
evening. But when the mean daily temperature is about 1 l-12” C. the species disappears. 
Cossio (1931) records the species biting at 15” C. at Monte Video. Creac’h, in the Lake 
Chad area, found numerous adults in the huts when the temperature was 15” C. But 
again, whilst temperature in the open may be low, conditions in buildings may afford 
protection. Adrien (1918) notes that in Syria the species still breeds in cold weather in 
cisterns indoors, attacking especially at night. 
It seems doubtful if either the adult or the larva undergoes true hibernation such as is 
exhibited by adults of Culex pipiens or larvae of Anopheles plumbeus. Over-wintering 
through the egg has been described and was discussed when dealing with the geographical 
distribution. Korovitzkii and Artemenko (1933) note that eggs were viable for six months 
in a room with a temperature sometimes as low as 16” C., but none survived the winter in 
the open with temperatures between - 4.5 and 17.2” C. Effects of temperature as studied 
experimentally in the laboratory will be described in due course later. 
One important effect of temperature indirectly affecting the species adversely is the 
slowing up of development to such a degree that time is not given in the warm season for 
completion of the life cycle, so that the species is prevented from permanently establishing 
itself. Normally in the tropics the period from hatching to emergence is a week or so. 
Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903), speaking of Cuba, say that at 26-27” C. night 
temperature and 28-3 1 O C. day temperature the period from hatching to adult took nine 
days at the earliest, but for the most part ten days. In the French Sudan Boulford (1908) 
55 
BIONOMICAL 
for the same period of development gives twelve to fifteen days in the rains and eighteen to 
twenty in the cold season. If three days be added for maturation of the eggs and three for 
time of emergence to the first blood meal and three for hatching time from oviposition, 
this gives a rough life cycle time of about sixteen to thirty days. In contrast to this are 
the observations of Gutzevich (1931) on AL;des aegypti in nature on the south Black Sea 
coast (temperature from May to October 21” C. average). The species here undergoes in 
the summer only three or four generations, the author giving forty to forty-five days for 
the life cycle. Korovitzkii and Artemenko record for Jugoslavia between May and the end 
of August (107 days) three generations out of doors and four in buildings, or about thirty- 
five days for the cycle out of doors. Further lengthening of the period it is evident might 
prevent the completion of even one life cycle. Aragao (1939), for a plateau region in Brazil, 
records that eggs take twenty days to hatch and oviposition sixteen to twenty days from 
time of the first blood meal, giving a life cycle period of thirty-nine to forty-three days or 
about the same length as at the limit of the species on the Black Sea coast. 
Starvation by prolonging the period of larval development may in some cases help to 
tide the species over periods of adversity, all the more so since the larva of A. aegypti 
displays, as will be described later, a rather remarkable resistance to starvation, continuing 
to exist and drawing on its food reserves for considerable periods in almost clean water. 
Nevertheless, undue prolongation of life from such a cause carries its own danger, for the 
result is apt to give rise to adults too small and weak to propagate the species. The effect of 
starvation on size raises the question of the normal size of the species in nature. In the 
laboratory considerable variation in size occurs when the species is bred artificially unless 
conditions are optimal. In nature in the author’s experience the species is usually of about 
the size as cultured under fairly good conditions in the laboratory. Any larger size than 
well-bred specimens in the laboratory is unusual. Mathis (1938) notes that in the warm rainy 
season size and fertility in nature equal, but are not greater than, those in the laboratory. 
In nature A. aegypti, in marked contrast to other house-frequenting species, is usually 
most active by day, the reason why in many tropical countries it is so annoying a pest. 
That it is active by day and less so, if noticeable at all, by night is such common experience 
that it is commonly described as the day-biting mosquito. Nevertheless, a number of 
authors have described the species as biting by night and the question how far it is active 
by night has been a matter of some controversy. It is also important where yellow fever 
occurs, since night activity may be necessary to consider in prevention. Marchoux, 
Salimbeni and Simond (1903), in contrast to usual ideas at the time, stated that the female 
is at first diurnal in biting, but later attacks by night, and Aragao notes that whilst the 
primiparous female attacks in the day, nocturnal feeding supervenes in females that have 
laid one batch of eggs. In the laboratory adults that have escaped behave with all the 
characteristic behaviour shown in the tropics as day-feeding mosquitoes. In the experi- 
mental cage, however, they feed apparently much the same, whether by day or night. The 
point has received additional importance recently since many records have been given of 
A. aegypti being captured feeding at night in dark native huts in Africa. Various points in 
connection with feeding will be considered later. Meantime, the apparently conflicting 
evidence as to the feeding habits of the species is probably due to the fact that feeding is not 
the result of a simple taxis, but involves more than one form of stimulus. Thus in a cage it 
is warmth of the attractive object that is mainly responsible. But, as described in a later 
chapter, localisation of a victim at a distance is largely through visual stimuli of a dark, 
56 
LIFE HISTORY 
moving object. It is a commonly held belief that mosquitoes find their prey through the 
sense of smell and evidence regarding this is considered later. It would seem, however, 
that with A. aegypti such a method of locating their victim is at most secondary to other 
stimuli. Behaviour is by no means necessarily the same, however, in all mosquitoes and in 
many respects A. aegyptidiffers markedly from some other forms that have been investigated. 
A final word may be said regarding length of life in nature. What this may be is very 
uncertain. In captivity, as shown later, females of the species may be kept alive for a year 
or more. In nature it is more likely to be a matter of two or three ovipositions, but methods 
of determining the age of mosquitoes caught in nature are as yet incapable of eliciting more 
than a very limited amount of information. 
(b) BREEDING PLACES 
In describing the breeding places of A. aegypti it will be most convenient to describe first 
the type of breeding place which the species almost invariably adopts as it is ordinarily 
encountered in association with man and where natural breeding places play a quite 
subsidiary part, and to follow this by some reference to occurrence of the species recently 
described as a wild form remote from man in forest or other uninhabited wild areas. 
As seen in association with man the breeding places of A. aegypti are almost entirely 
confined to artificial collections of water: small artificial collections of water (Boyce, 1910); 
water receptacles of all kinds (Barraud, 1934); artificial containers or things resembling 
these (Carter, 1924); any receptacle holding fresh water (Hamlyn-Harris, 1927); 925 per 
cent of domestic receptacles at Lagos examined by Graham in 1911; 84.4 per cent of 
those collected by Macfie and Ingram (19 16) in Accra. See also Soper, Wilson, Lima and 
Antunes (1943) on breeding places as encountered during the campaign against A. aegypti 
in Brazil. 
Such breeding places may be in the dwelling itself, for example the earthenware pots 
(chatties) or calabashes almost universal in native huts for storing water; anti-formicas, 
flower vases, neglected cups or jugs or other household collections of water in better-class 
houses. Or another type of breeding place about the house arises from defects or neglected 
features of the building itself, for example uncovered cisterns (Connor, 1922; Rigollot, 
1927), roof gutters (Jones, 1925), cracks in the masonry, traps of drains, or flush tanks 
or pans of water-closets when temporarily out of use. 
Or, especially during rainy periods, breeding places may be receptacles of various kinds 
about the vicinity of habitations, for example barrels for rain-water, rain-filled empty 
cans or food tins, flower pots, broken bottles or the hollows of upturned bottles used for 
decorative purposes, garden tanks or dumps (Thomas, 1910; Horne, 1913 ; Mhaskar, 
1913). In towns breeding may occur in stagnant ornamental fountains, horse troughs, etc. 
Especially prolific in breeding places are engineering and other dumps, due to rain-water 
collecting in hollows in iron girders, disused boilers, iron drums, motor-car parts, etc. 
The species is pre-eminently associated with shipping and harbours. Here it breeds in 
water-holding pockets in cranes, in bilge water in boats, unsealed pontoons and in drain 
traps. In ships, especially those long in tropical waters, larvae used frequently to be found 
in the containers for wash basins in cabins and in various places in the hold and elsewhere 
(Lutz and Machado, 1915 ; Chabrillat, 1934). Breeding is particularly common in stored 
water in barrels or tanks on country boats, dhows, etc. (Bana, 1936; Lewis, 1947). Water 
57 
BIONOMICAL 
left in unused canoes and boats may give rise to heavy breeding (Dutton, 1903; Macfie 
and Ingram, 1916). 
Wells have been recorded as breeding places: in Bombay (Liston and Akula, 1913); 
51 per cent of the wells in Lagos (Dalziel, 1920); the only breeding places in the Sahara 
(Baque and Kieffer, 1923). Where habitations in areas of heavy rainfall are closely sur- 
rounded by vegetation the species may breed in water collected in leaf axils in such situa- 
tions as Colocasia leaves (Carter, 1924; Haddow, 1948); in pineapple leaves or in the axils 
of banana leaves (Teesdale, 1941; Haddow, 1948). It is recorded breeding in stumps of 
recently felled trees (Garnham, Harper and Highton, 1946); in bamboo stumps (Clare, 
1916; Shannon, 1931); in slots cut in coconut trees. Haworth (1922) at Dar-es-Salaam 
recorded breeding in leaf axils at the top of coconut trees, but after careful search in the 
same locality Lester (1927) failed to find breeding in such a situation and thought it 
probable there had been some mistake. The species has been found breeding at certain 
water levels in crab-holes: at Lagos (Dalziel, 1920); at Dakar (Riqueau, 1929); at Togo 
(Cheneveau, 1934). On Banana Island at the mouth of the Congo Wanson (1935) found only 
resting adults of A&&s aegypti, though some other species were breeding. Tree-holes may 
be an important source of breeding for the species in some areas. Dalziel records 28 per 
cent of tree-holes at Lagos as showing larvae, and Allan (1935) in Sierra Leone found 
749 out of 1289 samples from tree-holes positive. However, Barraud states that in India 
it is unusual to find larvae of the species in tree-holes. 
A noticeable feature is that the species is rarely found breeding in pools or collections 
of water on the ground such as borrow-pits or earth drains in which all the edges are of 
earth or mud. Absence of breeding in such situations is ascribed by Gordon (1922) to 
the vulnerability of larvae to natural enemies. Also such waters are clearly not very 
attractive to the species, which prefers conditions where it can lay its eggs in some sheltered 
or confined situation and especially where these can be laid at the edge of the water 
cemented on some solid surface (see chapter XXII under oviposition). Breeding in rock 
pools, however, is a feature of the wild form as noted later. 
The above records relate mainly to the species as it occurs in association with man, 
natural breeding places being utilised only when close to or at a moderate distance from - 
habitations. In the case of the wild form breeding in forests and other uninhabited areas 
in Africa the breeding places described are chiefly tree-holes, rock pools, water courses 
with leaves or in receptacles placed as traps (Dunn, 1927 ; Haddow, 1945, 1948 ; Haddow 
et al. 1951). Tree-holes, however, are not necessarily the most frequent form of breeding 
place in such circumstances. Garnham, Harper and Highton (1946), in the Kaimosi 
Forest, Kenya (5500 feet altitude), give the following numbers for the different breeding 
places in which the wild form was found: tree-holes 2, rock pools in the shade 5, rock pools 
in sunlight 8, tree stumps 11, pools in river bed 34. Bamboo pots were negative. In the 
use of traps Haddow gives a warning that observations may be vitiated, unless care be 
taken, by eggs being present in the pots when set out. 
The water of breeding places is most commonly clean or with a moderate amount of 
organic matter present : clean (Ingram, 19 19) ; not very dirty (Howlett, 19 13) ; dirty and 
clean water equally (Graham, 1911) ; all but very foul water (Stephanides, 1937) ; never 
found in cess-pits (Mhaskar, 1913) ; or in water polluted with urine or faeces (James, 
Da Silva and Arndt, 1914). The larvae can exist in water with a very poor food supply 
(Aders, 1917), but very frequently, though the water is clean, there are fragments of food 
58 
BREEDING PLACES 
or other organic debris at the bottom. The pH of the water within wide limits is un- 
important (MacGregor, 1921; Rudolfs and Lackey, 1929). Though the species may be 
found in brackish water (Darling, 19 10; Drake-Brockman, 1913), sea water in any concen- 
tration over 50 per cent (1.6 per cent salt) is lethal (Macfie, 1922). Much information on 
breeding in saline waters is given by Balfour (1921). Cossio (193 1) notes that in Uruguay 
larvae are found especially in water of alkaline reaction. 
(c) NATURAL ENEMIES 
A very full account of natural enemies of mosquitoes recorded up to date of that publi- 
cation has been given in the first volume of Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912). * Though a 
great many natural enemies of mosquitoes have been recorded in the literature not many 
of these relate to A?des aegypti, since breeding in this case is to a large extent restricted to 
domestic utensils or other situations that are relatively free from predaceous forms, whilst 
the adult is largely protected by its indoor habits. It may be useful, however, to give an 
account of natural enemies of mosquitoes in general and when doing so note such as have 
actually been recorded attacking A. aegypti under experimental conditions or in nature. 
It will be convenient to consider natural enemies as divided into those active against the 
aquatic stages (larva and pupa), those destroying the adult mosquito and those attacking 
the egg. 
NATURAL ENEMIES OF THE AQUATIC STAGES 
Plants and lower forms of animal life. Among forms destructive to larvae are certain aquatic 
carnivorous plants, notably the bladder-worts (Utricularia) which have small trap-like 
receptacles into which insects, including mosquito larvae, can enter but not return (Darwin, 
1875; Galli-Valerio and Rochaz de Jongh, 1909 ; Eysell, 1924). A species has been 
described as destructive to larvae in pools in Trinidad (Hart, 1906) and one in bromelia- 
ceous plants in Brazil (Krause, 1887). The plant Genlisea ornata in Brazil acts in the same 
way and a species of submerged sundew (Aldrovanda vesciculosa) traps larvae in Europe 
(Eysell). A good account of the capture of larvae by plants of the genus Utricularia is 
given by Brumpt (1925). 
Certain plants that are not actively destructive may still act as enemies by covering the 
surface of the water or through their products. Among the first-mentioned are the duck- 
weeds, notably the rootless duckweeds, Woolfa arhiza and AzoZZa (J. B. Smith, 1910; 
Bentley, 19 10). Water covered by these forms may be rendered quite unsuitable for 
breeding. Extensive sheets of water may be rendered unsuitable (except for certain species 
which it may favour) by the water lettuce, Pistia, or the water hyacinth. Certain species of 
Chara are credited with a deterrent effect, apparently due to liberation of oxygen (Matheson 
and Hinman, 1928, 1931). Certain plants are said to be favourable, for example Nas- 
turtium officinalis and Spirogyra (Waterston, 19 18). 
Among low forms of animal life Hydra may in certain circumstances be destructive to 
* See also accounts by Wilson (1914), Waterston (1918), Purdy (1920), MacGregor (1920), Young (1921), 
Eysell (1924), Hayes (1930), and the summaries of recorded forms with bibliography by Hinman (1934). A very 
interesting and full description of natural enemies encountered in New Britain is that by Laird (1947). Other 
authors recording natural enemies are given in the text. Some of the forms here treated as parasites (see (d) below) 
may also be considered as natural enemies. 
59 
BIONOMICAL 
larvae (Dyar in Howard, Dyar and Knab, 1912). Vorticella, by excessive growth on the 
bodies of larvae, may cause death (Seguy, 1923). Larvae so affected appear white and 
gelatinous or fluffy. A planarian has been recorded as destroying larvae of Agde,s aegypti 
in a glass tank (Lischetti, 1919). Water snails have been found to have an adverse effect 
and may feed on eggs or egg-rafts (Hamlyn-Harris, 1929; Gasanov, 1938). Water fleas 
(Daphne) may destroy larvae, biting or pulling off their long lateral hairs so that the larvae 
are disabled and drown (Wilson, 1914). 
None of the above would appear to have any importance as enemies of AL;des aegypti. 
Predaceous arthropods. A great many predaceous aquatic insects, as also some hydrachnids, 
have been noted as attacking larvae, though the fact that they do so under artificial condi- 
tions in the laboratory does not always provide a measure of their effectiveness in nature. 
A predaceous mite, Limnesia jamurensis, is described by Laird as actively attacking 
young larvae and eggs experimentally and as appearing to play a useful role in keeping 
down the number of larvae in pools where it was abundant in New Britain. The same 
author notes that Hearle (1926) refers to a predaceous mite (hydrachnid) in swamps in 
British Columbia making mosquito larvae its chief food. 
Dragonfly larvae have been considered important natural enemies by Lamborn and his 
collaborators (1890). But the fact that they are bottom feeders has been thought to make 
this doubtful on any scale in nature. Ephemerid larvae have also been observed attacking 
mosquito larvae (Foley and Yvernault, 1908). 
In the order Coleoptera both adults and larvae of Dytiscidae and the larvae of Hydro- 
philidae, as also Gyrinidae, are actively predaceous (J. B. Smith, 19 10; Viereck, 1904; 
Britton and Viereck, 1905; Laird, 1947). Laird, after introducing 100 gyrinid beetles to a 
temporary rain pool about 12 by 4 feet containing about 500 larvae of Anopheles punctu- 
Zatus, found only forty-six larvae after 24 hours and none after a further 24 hours. In 
Alaska Sailer and Lienk (1954) describe the beetle Agapus as destroying in twenty-one days 
sixty mosquito larvae and ten pupae. Not all Dytiscidae are, however, effective in this 
respect (D’Emmerez de Charmoy, 1902 ; Derivaux, 19 16). Macfie (1923) records the tiger 
beetle, Cicindela octoguttata, as preying on larvae and pupae at the edges of pools in the 
Gold Coast, gripping the larvae by the posterior extremity and the pupae by the cephalo- 
thorax. A natural enemy acting indirectly are the small beetles (Halticinae) which Hamlyn- 
Harris (1930) describes in Australia as poisoning not only the vegetation, but also water in 
the neighbourhood making this fatal to larvae. 
Aquatic bugs, Notanecta, Corixa and other genera, have been noted as actively destroying 
larvae (Dempwolff, 1904, and other authors). The bug Laccotrophes kohlii (Nepidae) has 
been experimented with as a control measure in China (Hoffmann, 1927); a belostomid 
(Sphaerodema) also gave some results. Laird found that the notonectid Enithares sharply 
reduced larvae of Ai;des scutellaris when introduced into a water drum and mentions it as 
one of the natural enemies that might be of practical use. 
Anthomyid flies of the genus Lispa have been observed attacking larvae, pupae and 
emerging adults at the water surface : L. sinensis at Hong Kong (Atkinson, 1909) ; L. tuber- 
culata acting similarly in Europe (Dufour, 1864); L. tentaxulata var. sakhalensis in Japan 
(Yamada, 1927); as also certain Dolichopodidae observed behaving in a similar manner at 
Panama (Osterhout). Simulium has been recorded attacking newly emerged mosquitoes 
(Osterhout ; Combes, 1896). 
60 
NATURAL ENEMIES 
That the larvae of AZdes aegypti are extremely vulnerable to the attacks of such natural 
enemies as many of the above under experimental conditions has been shown by Gordon 
(1922). Nevertheless, few of the forms mentioned are likely to be of importance against 
A. aegypti under natural conditions owing to the type of breeding place in which the 
species is found. A certain number of predatory forms attacking A. aegypti in nature have, 
however, been described. Shannon (1929) observed the larva of a tipulid, Sigmatomera, 
preying upon A?des aegllpti larvae in tree-holes in Brazil. Carter (1919) records larvae of 
A. aegypti as being preyed upon in west Africa by a species of Forcipomyia (Ceratopo- 
goninae). Much the most effective and important of all insect enemies of the species are 
the cannibal larvae of certain species of mosquito which frequent many of the breeding 
places utilised by A. aegypti and when present may decimate this species. 
Cannibal mosquito larvae. Where A. aegypti is breeding in bamboo stumps, a common 
breeding place near dwellings in many areas, or breeding places of a similar type, an active 
and common enemy are cannibal larvae of various species of Megarhinus. Such larvae are 
extremely voracious (Green, 1905 ; Morgan and Cotton, 1908 ; Senior White, 1920; 
Pruthi, 1928). A single megarhine larva was observed by Garnham et al. to devour twenty- 
one AZdes aegypti larvae in a night. Laird in New Britain notes that two larvae of Megar- 
hinus inornatus in five days destroyed sixty-eight third and fourth instar larvae of Agdes 
albolineatus, fifty-nine of A2des scutellaris and thirty of the larger larvae of Armigeres 
Zacuum, but only seven pupae under similar conditions. He notes that the species breeds in co- 
conut husks and other small containers in heavy shade just within the edge of the jungle. Paiva 
(19 10) describes the larva of Toxorhynchites immisericors (Megarhinussplendens) as commonly 
preying on larvae OfAgdesaegypti in earthenware water storage pots in Calcutta. Megarhinus 
has been introduced as a means of controlling A?des spp. into areas outside its normal range. 
Attempts to introduce it into Hawaii do not appear to have been successful (Swezey, 1931), 
but M. splendens, not previously recorded east of New Britain, was successfully established 
in Fiji as a measure directed against Ai;des scutellaris, a vector of dengue (Paine, 1934). 
Another effective cannibal genus is Lutzia. Jackson (1953) records that one larva of the 
African species Lutzia tigripes ate eighty-eight larvae of Acdes aegypti, preferring this to 
other species. In India the larvae of Lutzia are most commonly seen in association with 
Culex larvae in garden sumps and when present leave very few of the victim species to 
emerge. But they may also be found with the larvae of A?des aegypti in certain types of 
breeding place. Haddow (1942) found Culex tigripes reducing the larvae of Anopheles in 
borrow pits in Kenya. Howard (1910) notes that Lutzia bigotii effectively destroyed larvae 
of Atides aegypti breeding in artificial containers in Rio de Janeiro. 
Still another genus of mosquito with cannibal larvae is Mucidus. The larvae of M. scata- 
phagoides are found in India in natural pools (Christophers, 1906 ; Bedford, 19 19 ; Barraud, 
1934). Psorophora and Lestiocampa (Goeldia) are New World forms with similar canni- 
balistic habits, the latter a sabethine mosquito occurring in collections of water in brome- 
liaceous plants (Howard et al. 19 12). The larvae of a number of non-biting Culicidae are 
actively predaceous : Corethra and Eucorethra (Underwood, 1903); Mochlonyx and 
Chaoborus (Sailer and Lienk, 1954) ; as also are the larvae of some Chironomidae, for 
example Tanypus (Knab, 1912). 
Vertebrate enemies of the aquatic stages. 
of mosquitoes in nature are various small Probably the most effective of all natural enemies 
larvivorous fish. Small fish of this kind are indeed 
61 
BIONOMICAL 
the only natural enemy that has been extensively used with success in the control of 
mosquito breeding as a sanitary measure. This applies to the control of both Anopheles 
and, to an even greater extent, of Aedes aegypti. The use of fish in control of A. aegypti 
breeding is too important a measure to be adequately dealt with here and will be gone into 
more fully in the section on control. 
Certain batrachians have been listed as natural enemies of the larva: the frog, Disco- 
glossus pictus, in North Africa (Galli-Valerio and Rochaz de Jongh, 1908); tadpoles of 
the Spadefoot Toad, Scaphiosus hammondi (Barber and King, 1927, 1928) ; the Western 
Salamander, Diemyctylus tortosus (Howard et al. 19 12); the Vermilion Spotted Newt, 
Diemyctylus viridescens (Matheson and Hinman, 1929). Frogs and toads and their tad- 
poles are not, however, as a rule larvivorous (Galli-Valerio and Rochaz de Jongh). 
Lewis (1942) in the Sudan found small water tortoises, Pelomedusa galeata, commonly 
present in stored water pots. These fed voraciously on larvae and pots containing them 
were free from larvae. 
Ducks and other aquatic birds have been shown to destroy larvae under certain circum- 
stances and ducks have been suggested and experimentally proved effective as a control 
measure (editorial, J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 1916). 
NATURAL ENEMIES OF THE IMAGO 
Arthropod enemies. Among arthropods that are natural enemies are spiders and other 
arachnids and various predaceous insects. 
Spiders have been considered very important natural enemies by a number of observers 
(J. B. Smith, 19 10; McCook, 1890, and others in America; Leon, 19 10, in Roumania; 
Nichols, 1912, in the West Indies ; O’Connell, 1912). The jumping spiders, Salticus, are 
especially referred to by Marchoux et al. (1903) and by Nichols. Bacot (19 16) notes a 
spider, Uloborus feniculatus, the arachnids, Monomorium pharaonis L. and Solenopsis 
geminata F., also a scorpion, Isometrus maculatus, as attacking ALides aegypti. Mathis 
and Berland (1933) describe an African domestic spider, Plexippus paykulli, as capturing 
most of the mosquitoes bred out in a cage, and the same spider is also referred to by Mathis 
(1938). Spiders of the genera Epeira and Meta, which spin webs over pools in New Britain, 
are given as of some importance as predators by Laird. Among acarids may be mentioned 
the larvae of water mites (Hydrachnidae), commonly found attached by their proboscis to 
the adults of mosquitoes, which breed in some natural waters and which are described later 
among parasites affecting mosquitoes. 
Among insects are : dragonflies (Lamborn and collaborators) ; Panorpidae (Eysell) ; the 
reduviid bug, Emesia Zongipes, which infests houses in certain parts of the United States 
(Howard et al.) ; predaceous Hymenoptera (Bates, 1863 ; Ferton, 1901) ; predaceous Diptera 
such as Empidae (Wahlberg, 1847); Asilidae (Eysell); and Scatophagidae (Wahlberg). 
In Cuba a wasp, Monedula, has been observed capturing adult Ai;des aegypti, one specimen 
capturing on the wing twenty in five minutes (Howard et al.). A wasp in Corsica which 
stocks its nest with mosquitoes is described by Ferton. Drake-Brockman (1913) in 
Somaliland observed ants attacking newly emerged A. aegypti. Here also should be 
mentioned the small midges, Culicoides, which attack and suck the blood from gorged 
mosquitoes and which, since they are usually found attached by their proboscis to their 
victim, are dealt with in the section on parasites. 
62 
NATURAL ENEMIES 
Vertebrate natural enemies. Liston (1901) sometimes found mosquitoes in the stomach of 
frogs in Bombay. Geckoes and insectivorous lizards have been observed feeding on 
mosquitoes (Giles, 1902; Shannon, Burke and Davis, 1930; Hayes, 1930). Other important 
vertebrate enemies are insectivorous birds and bats. Waterston in Macedonia considered 
swallows to be very important natural enemies and Theobald (1901) observed house martins 
catching Anopheles in flight in England. Goat-suckers (Harvey, 1880) and the Cuban 
night-hawk, Chordeiles (Jennings, 1908), which feed at dusk, have also been recorded as 
feeding on mosquitoes. 
Though insectivorous bats are credited with great destructive power against mosquitoes 
and have been recommended for control purposes, few careful observations seem to have 
been made and, whether effective or not in nature, their use in control seems generally to 
have been found impracticable (Herms and Gray, 1940, p. 238). For references to the 
literature dealing with the use of bats in control see Cove11 (1941). 
NATURAL ENEMIES ATTACKING THE EGGS 
In the laboratory the eggs of AL;des aegypti are open to serious attack when left unpro- 
tected in a stored condition. Bacot (19 16) found the chief enemy of stored eggs to be a 
psocid. In the present author’s experience precautions are necessary, not only against 
psocids, but even more so against cockroaches if such be present. The latter, if they gain 
access, browse on the deposit of eggs, completely removing these and leaving only the 
characteristic cockroach faeces behind. If eggs are kept moist, mites are apt to occur in 
large numbers, but whether they attack the eggs is not known. An adult hydrachnid mite, 
Limnesia jamurensis, was found by Laird in New Britain to consume eggs readily experi- 
mentally. Buxton and Hopkins (1927) found eggs of AEdes variegatus being carried off 
by ants. 
(d) PARASITES 
Except for some early references to moulds attacking mosquitoes and a possible reference 
to nematodes by Leuchert (see Howard et al. p. 162) the first to record parasites in 
mosquitoes was Ross, who in 1895 noted the presence of gregarines in a species of Ac?des 
and subsequently published a list of other parasites encountered by him from 1895 to 1898 
(Ross, 1898, 1906). Since then many authors have recorded and described parasites in the 
larva and adult form of mosquitoes so that there is a very considerable literature in this 
respect. Of authors giving lists of recorded parasites may be mentioned especially Speer 
(1927) who gives a complete documented list of the parasites of mosquitoes up to the date 
of his publication. * 
As with natural enemies, comparatively few of the long list of parasites have been 
recorded from A. aegypti, which from the nature of its usual breeding places is less exposed 
to many forms of parasite than are anophelines and many culicines that habitually breed 
in natural waters. It will probably, however, be most useful to note what parasites of 
* See also Dye (1905), Howard et al., Patton and Cragg (1913), Bresslau and Buschkiel (1919), Martini (1920), 
Seguy (1923), Missiroli (1928, 1929, Italy), Feng (1933a, b, China), Brumpt (1936), Iyengar (1938, India), Steinhaus 
(1946), Bates (1949), Christophers (1952). A list of recorded fungai and protozoan parasites is given by Keilin 
(1921 a, b). Other authors describing particular forms are mentioned below in the text. 
63 
BIONOMICAL 
mosquitoes have been described and to point out and describe somewhat more fully 
those recorded from A. aegypti. Both vegetable and animal forms have been recorded as 
parasites of mosquitoes, notably in the first case moulds, and in the case of animal para- 
sites the protozoa. But worms and mites are important endo- and ecto-parasites respec- 
tively and there is one semi-parasitic insect, the tiny voracious midge, Culicoides, more 
correctly perhaps considered a predator, which sucks the blood from the gut of the success- 
ful predator mosquito. Taken seriatim the parasites of mosquitoes can be enumerated as 
follows. 
Bacteria, rickettsia and yeasts. The only bacterial parasite recorded, apart from disease 
organisms, is a bacterium resembling a Leptothrix described by Perroncito (1900) as 
parasitic and pathogenic in the larva of Anopheles maculipennis. 
Rickettsial forms are described by Sellards and Siler (1928) in AL;des aegypti infected 
with the virus of dengue (see also Montoussis, 1929). The authors note that certain stages 
in the gregarine, Lankesteria, may simulate these forms. An intracellular Rickettsia is 
described by Brumpt (1938) in the stomach of Culex fatigans (Rickettsia culicis Brumpt). 
Yeasts may be present in the gut and air diverticula, especially in mosquitoes fed on fruit 
or sugar. Yeasts are recorded as present in the coelomic cavity in Anopheles maculipennis 
by Laveran (1902) and by Marchoux et al. in Ai;des aegypti. 
Moulds and fungi. Many records of mycelial fungi of various kinds in the larva and adult 
of mosquitoes are given in the literature. Adult mosquitoes under certain conditions are 
liable to be attacked and destroyed by fungi of the Empusa type (E. culicis Braun; E. papil- 
Zata) and by Entomophora (Braun, 1855; Thaxter, 1888; Pettit, 1903) ; see account by 
Howard et al. Leon (1924) describes tumours with mycelium in Anopheles maculipennis 
following bites by Culicoides. A number of fungal forms are also described parasitising 
the larva. Liston (1901) records a form in Bombay resembling Trichophyton on the surface 
of the larva. Macfie (19 17) describes the larva of Ai;des sp. in the laboratory as covered 
with fungal hyphae (Nocardia and an unidentified fungus), also as infected in nature with 
a brown fungal mass in the thorax (Fusarium). There are also forms described by Leger 
and Duboscq (1903), Langeron (1929), Chorine and Baranoff (1929). A fungus, PoZy- 
scytalum, has been found covering the eggs of Psorophora (Howard et al.). Galli-Valerio 
and Rochaz de Jongh (1905) infected the larvae of both CuZex and Anopheles with Asper- 
gillus niger and A. glaucus, such infection causing the peritrophic membrane and faeces to 
pass out in long lengths in place of breaking off. Dye (1905) describes a mould in the 
digestive tube and coelome of Aedes aegypti. According to Dye, Vaney and Conte found 
‘ altises’ (Culex pipiens?) adults and larvae destroyed by the fungus Botrytis bassianae, but 
he gives no date or reference. 
Keilin (192 1 b) described as Coelomomyces stegomyiae a fungus in Aedes scutellaris larvae 
from Federated Malay States sent to him by Lamborn. This occurs as a septate mycelium 
ramified over the viscera with terminal thickenings which become detached and form oval 
multi-nucleated sporangia with very thick walls. The sporangia, which resemble nematode 
eggs or Coccidia, measure some 37-57,~ in length by 20-30 ,U in breadth. They occur in 
large numbers packed in the anal papillae and other parts Similar forms have been 
described by Iyengar (1935) in Anopheles larvae in India (C. indiana and C. anophelesica) ; 
by Walker (1938) in A. gambiae; and in the same species causing heavy mortality by 
Muspratt (1946). The forms described by Manalang (1930) as probably Coccidia may also 
64 
PARASITES 
be this fungus, Coelomomyces being clearly a frequent and important parasite of Anopheles 
larvae. Van Thiel (1954) has described sporangia of a species of the same fungus in the 
ovary of an adult Anopheles tessellatus. The Coelomomyces parasitic in mosquito larvae 
have been reviewed by Couch (1945) who describes a species, C. psorophorae, in Psorophora 
ciliata larva; see also Couch and Dodge (1947). A form distinct from but close to Coelomo- 
myces psorophorae is described by Laird (1956) in larvae of Ai;des (pseudoskusea) australis 
in Tasmania (Coelomomyces tasmaniensis). The larvae in this case are a brackish-water 
species. As noted above, the oval sporangia are liable to be taken for nematode eggs. 
Spirochaetes. Spirochaetes have been recorded in the adult and larva of various species 
of mosquito: Schaudinn (1904); Ed. and Et. Sergent (1906) in the intestine of both Culex 
and Anopheles; Patton (1907) in Culex fatigans in India; Jaffe (1907) as Sp. culicis in the 
digestive tract of the larva and in the Malpighian tubules of the adult of Culex in Germany. 
A large spirochaete has been described by Wenyon (1911) in the gut of the larva and 
Malpighian tubules of the adult of Ai;des aegypti. Spirochaetes have also been recorded 
in the intestine of this species by Not and Stevenel(l913) and in the Malpighian tubules by 
Not (1920) in Martinique. The first-mentioned species resembled Sp. refringens, those in 
the Malpighian tubules were very fine and small forms. Patton and Cragg note spiro- 
chaetes as common in the Malpighian tubules of Aedes aegypti in Madras. Spirochaetes 
are described in the salivary glands of Anopheles funestus in French West Africa by Masseguin 
and Palinacci (1954) and in the salivary glands of A. gambiae in the same area by Masse- 
guin, Palinacci and Brumpt (1954). An account of spirochaetal infections of mosquitoes is 
given by Sinton and Shute (1939) and a list of recorded findings by Colas-Belcour (1954). 
Gregarines. A gregarine, Lankesteria culicis (Ross), was first described from India in a 
species of Atides (Ross, 1898, 1906), and later by Marchoux et al. in Brazil. The same 
species was noted by Wenyon (1911) in Mesopotamia. Its life history has been described 
by Wenyon (1926). See also Ray (1933) ; Ganapati and Tate (1949). 
Wenyon describes mobile pear-shaped or elongate forms in the gut of the larva, which, 
when the larva pupates, pass into the Malpighian tubules where they associate in pairs 
and encyst. Cysts with numerous oocysts, each with eight sporozoites, are present in the 
Malpighian tubules of the adult. Spores brought with eggs from West Africa developed in 
England (Stevenson and Wenyon, 1915). The same gregarine is recorded in Aedes aegypti 
by Bacot (19 16) and by Macfie (19 17) in West Africa ; by Feng (1930) in various species of 
AL;des in China; by Martirano (1901) in Italy; by Mathis and Baffet (1934) in France; as 
also still more recently by Ganipati and Tate in A. geniculatus in England. In A. (Finlaya) 
geniculatus, as described by the last-mentioned authors, the earlier stages are intra- 
epithelial in the anterior portion of the gut in the larva. After a period of growth the tropho- 
zoites are liberated into the gut and attach themselves to the epithelium by a well-developed 
epimerite, which functions as a sucker. Cyst formation and further stages in sporogony 
take place in the Malpighian tubules when the larva becomes the pupa. In the adult 
mosquito only ripe sporocysts are found, packed in the Malpighian tubules and scattered 
in the hind gut. The spores escape through the alimentary canal. 
A gregarine, Diplocystis, from the body cavity of a larva of a species of Culex is described 
by Leger and Duboscq, and a species of gregarine on the outer wall of the mid-gut in 
Anopheles maculipennis adult resembling oocysts of the malaria parasite is described by 
Johnson (1903). A species, Caulleryella anophelis, has been described in the intestine of the 
5 CH 
BIONOMICAL 
larva of Anopheles bz@catus (A. claviger) by Hesse (19lQ and still another species, 
Caulleryella pipientis, in the larva of Culex pipiens, and other species of mosquito by 
Bresslau and Buschkiel, as also Caulleryella maligna in an Anopheles in Brazil by Godoy 
and Pinto (1923). Mathis and Baffet describe a method by which an infected strain of 
Aiides aegypti can be obtained free from such parasites. Isolated females were fed on a 
rabbit and after passing faeces were transferred to a fresh cage and allowed to oviposit 
on wet wool. 
Flagellates. Flagellates commonly occur in the gut and rectum of adult mosquitoes and in 
the aflagellate stage in the larva. There are two types, Leptomonas (Herpetomonas) without 
an undulating membrane, and Crithidia with short undulating membrane. Both forms 
have been recorded in many culicine and anopheline mosquitoes in many countries: 
Chatterjee (1901, Crithidial forms) ; Leger (1902, C. fasciculatus in Anopheles maculipennis) ; 
Johnson (1903) ; Novy, MacNeal and Torrey (1907, H. culicis) ; Patton (1907, 19 12) ; 
Missiroli (1928). Besides the usual record of forms in the gut, Mathis (1914) describes 
a trypanosome-like form in the salivary glands of a species of Culex. Trypanosomes have 
also been found in the salivary glands of C. jatigans in India by Viswanathan and Bhatt 
(1948) and by Jaswant Singh, Ramakrishnan and David (1950). In the case of the last- 
mentioned authors the trypanosomes occurred along with sporozoites in a laboratory- 
bred C. fatigans fed on a sparrow with cryptic infection (see also Ramakrishnan, David 
and Nair (1956) who describe the trypanosome stages). 
In A&des aegypti leptomonad forms have been recorded by Durham and Myers (1902) 
in Brazil and by Ed. and Et. Sergent (1906) in Algeria (L. algeriensis). Leptomonad forms 
were found in the larva of AtYdes aegypti, but not in the adult, by Wenyon (1911) in 
Mesopotamia. Not and Stevenel record Herpetomonas in the digestive tract of AL;des 
aegypti in Martinique. Patton (1912) and Patton and Cragg record Herpetomonas culicis 
in Agdes in Madras. 
The growth characters on media of different flagellates have been described by Noller 
(1917). For summaries dealing with the flagellates of mosquitoes see Thompson and 
Robertson (1925) and Wallace (1943). 
Thelohania and other microsporidial forms. Various microsporidia have been recorded in 
the adult and larva of mosquitoes. A very full study has been made by Kudo (1921-5), see 
also Iyengar (1930). Under this head are included Nosema culicis in the body cavity of 
CuZex pipiens larva (Bresslau and Buschkiel); Nosema stegomyiae in the intestine of the 
imago (Lutz and Splendore, 1908); Nosema sp. in AL;des nemorosus adult and larva (Noller, 
1920) ; Nosema anophelis in adult Anopheles quadrimaculatus in North America (Kudo) 
and in A. maculipennis in Italy (Missiroli, 1929). 
A characteristic type is Thelohania with pansporoblasts containing eight spores occurring 
in various tissues including the developing ova in the ovary (Christophers, 1901). Kudo 
recognises a number of species, namely T. Zegeri Hesse, T. obesa, T. pyriformis, T. ano- 
phelis, all in larvae of Anopheles sp., l also T. rotunda, T. opacita, T. minuta in culicine 
species. All but the first have been named by the author. Missiroli refers to these as also 
to another species which he does not name. A study of the development and extrusion of 
the filament from the spores is given by Iyengar. According to this author the spores are 
small and not distinguishable under a 2/3 objective. Though Thelohania forms are extremely 
common in various species of Anopheles the absence of records for AL;des aegypti is notice- 
66 
PARASITES 
able. Ross (1906) has recorded a form with eight spores in the adult of a small species of 
Stegomyia in India as well as in Culex fatigans. 
Under the name of Glugea are some ambiguous forms including Myxosporidium stego- 
myiae of Parker, Beyer and Pothier (1903) and Glugea (Nosema or Pleistophora) stegomyiae 
of Marchoux et al. found in the body cavity and tissues of Ad;des aegypti in Cuba and Brazil 
respectively. Another form of doubtful nature is Serumsporidium (Nosema) sp. in A&des 
serratus in Brazil (Lutz and Splendore). Besides Nosema anophelis, Missiroli (1928, 1929) 
describes a sarcosporidial form, Sarcocystis anophelis. Recently Canning (1957) has given 
a description of a species Plistophora culicis Weiser parasitic in the Malpighian tubules of 
Anopheles gambiae. The parasite forms oval sporonts 25-26-5 ,U in diameter with closely 
packed nuclei, which may be mistaken for oocysts. It also occurs in the tissues and fat- 
body. It was originally described by Weiser in Culex pipiens. 
Ciliates. A ciliate, Lambornella stegomyiae Keilin, is recorded by Lamborn (1921) in the 
larva of Aedes scutellaris (albopictus) from Malaya and its characters and life history have 
been described by Keilin (1921 a). It consists of oval, actively motile forms 50-70 p in 
diameter which are present in large numbers, especially in the anal papillae, but also in 
other parts. It passes out of the body through ruptures and encysts on the larval cuticle 
and probably elsewhere. A ciliate, Glaucoma sp. (probably G. pyriformis), is described by 
MacArthur (1922) in Theobaldia annulata in England (see also Wenyon, 1926). The para- 
sites are mostly 25-40 p in length with large cytostome. They are commonly found in the 
head and a feature of the infection is destruction of the eyes. As many as a thousand may 
be present in a single larva. 
An interesting account of a parasitic ciliate, probably a form of Glaucoma pyriformis 
(G. pyriformis Ehrenberg), found in the body cavity of several species of tree-hole-breeding 
culicines in Northern Rhodesia is given by Muspratt (1945). It occurs in two forms, A 
and B. A multiplies rapidly by binary fission in the haemocoele of the larva finally causing 
death. B seldom divides, if at all, does not kill the larva, and has been recovered from the 
adult. The parasites escape from the body of the larva by rupture of the anal papillae. In 
some species of mosquito, including AL;des aegypti, the anal papillae are tough and do not 
rupture. On this account, though A. aegypti can be infected, it is not a suitable host and 
so seems to be biologically distinct from Lambornella stegomyiae Keilin. Also it does not 
attack the eyes of the larva but tends to congregate round the heart when it first enters, 
thus differing from Glaucoma pyriformis MacArthur, 1922. Infection is by free-living 
ciliates which encyst on the larval cuticle just before ecdysis and penetrate to the haemo- 
coele through the new cuticle when this is soft. 
Trematodes. Of helminths, encysted trematodes (Agamodistomum) are not uncommon in 
the larva and adult of Anopheles (Chatterjee, 1901; Martirano, 1901; Schoo, 1902; Ruge, 
1903 ; Alessandrini, 1909 ; Sinton, 19 17 ; Soparkar, 19 18 ; Joyeux, 19 18 ; van Thiel, 192 l-54 ; 
Eckstein, 1922; Iyengar, 1930; Corradetti, 1937; and probably others). The species 
recorded include A. sintoni in various species of Anopheles in India and A. anophelis in 
Anopheles maculipennis. The life history has been worked out very completely by van Thiel. 
The cysts are large, about 150-200 t_~ in diameter, and usually show a trematode bent 
sharply upon itself. They are found in the body cavity and in the tissues of various 
parts. The corresponding Cercaria of A. anophelis discovered by van Thiel (1922, 1925) 
develops into a sporocyst in the liver of the mollusc Planorbis vertex and later (van 
67 5-2 
BIONOMICAL 
Thiel, 1930a, b) into the fluke Pneumonoeces variegatus parasitic in the lung of the frog, 
Rana esculenta (van Thiel, 1954). 
Nematodes. Immature nematode parasites (Agamomermis) have been described in the larva 
and adult of various species of mosquito (Johnson, 1903; J. B. Smith, 1903; Stiles, 1903; 
Gendre, 1909; Iyengar, 1930, 1935). The species referred to by Johnson and J. B. Smith is 
Agamomermis culicis Stiles, parasitic in Culex sollicitans in America. The species described 
by Gendre is from Acdes aegypti. It occurs in the body cavity in pairs, a large and a small 
form, and escapes through the perianal membrane when the larva is about to pupate. The 
species described by Iyengar in Anopheles occurs as a single large adult worm, smaller 
worms in the same larva dying off. The fully grown worm escapes into the water by 
rupturing the body wall of the larva, which dies immediately. In the water the worms 
become sexually mature and give birth to numerous young larvae which swim about 
actively. These move about on the surface of the water and hold on to young larvae whilst 
piercing the cuticle to gain entrance to the haemocoele. Iyengar also notes that certain 
other large species of Mermis are found in adult mosquitoes. They are sexually mature 
when they emerge. A mermethid nematode is described in AL;des communis in Canada by 
Jenkins and West (1954). The larval stages of the nematodes Foleyella ranae and F. doli- 
choptera infesting certain frogs in North America have been obtained by Causey (1939) 
in A?des aegypti, Culex fatigans and C. pipiens. Developing and mature infective larvae 
were present in the head, abdomen and thoracic muscles of mosquitoes fed on infected 
frogs. A parasitic nematode (Agamomermis) is described by Muspratt (1947) in larvae of 
tree-hole breeding species of mosquito in Northern Rhodesia and has been successfully 
cultured in the laboratory and Atides aegypti infected. 
Among nematodes parasitic in mosquitoes are also those giving rise to filariasis in man 
and animals, including various species of Filaria in man and DiroJiZaria of the dog (see 
Ch. IV (a)). 
Mites. Acarids (Hydrachnidae larvae) are common on adult Anopheles and various 
culicines that breed in weedy waters. They occur, attached by their rostrum, clustered 
about the under side of the body, especially about the neck. For information about such 
forms see Edwards (1922) ; Balfour (1923) ; W. H. Dye (1924). Records of such mites have 
been given by : Hodges (1902) ; Gros (1904) ; Ed. and Et. Sergent (1904) ; Galli-Valerio and 
Rochaz de Jongh (1907) ; Macfie (19 16) ; Boyd (1922). The acarids are larval forms with six 
legs only which attach themselves to the adult mosquito in the act of emergence. The life 
history of a Japanese water-mite, the larvae of which attach themselves to the pupa and 
transfer to the adult mosquito at emergence, is described by Uchida and Miyazaki (1935). 
A larval mite, Limnesia, described by Laird (1947) from New Britain which attaches itself 
in this way is in the adult stage a predator of young larvae and eggs (see (c)). 
Where such mites have been attached, peculiar tubular tunnels lined with chitin develop 
(Marshall and Staley, 1929; Feng, 1930; Feng, 1933a, b; Feng and Hoeppli, 1933). 
Diptera. Since the minute blood-sucking midges, Culicoides, are found attached more or 
less permanently by their proboscis to their victim they may be considered as semi- 
parasitic. An account of these forms is given by Edwards (1922). In all cases seen by this 
author the species was the same, namely C. anophelis Edw., and records by others are, 
when named, given as this species. Usually records are from oriental tropical countries 
(India, Burma, Malaya, Indochina). Leon, however, records such mites from Roumania. 
68 
PARASITES 
In almost all cases too the mosquito attacked is an Anopheles, but a specimen of Armigeres 
Vacuum so infested is described by Laird (1946) who gives an excellent review of the litera- 
ture with a figure of the midge. The midges are usually found attached on the abdomen of 
the gorged female with their mouth-parts deeply embedded. They are not found on males 
and there seems no reason to doubt but that their objective is the blood in the gut of the 
gorged mosquito. 
Though not strictly a case of parasitism the oestrid fly Dermatobia hominis, the human 
warble fly, utilises mosquitoes, especially Psorophora, by attaching its eggs to the mos- 
quitoe’s abdomen so that these may be carried to their host to hatch out when the mosquito 
feeds, see Sambon (1922). 
The black spores of Ross. A word may be said about the black spores of Ross and other 
authors (see description by Brumpt, 1938) once thought possibly to be some stage in the 
malaria parasite cycle. The appearances are now known to be formed by deposition of 
chitin on dead structures in the body of the mosquito, including dead oocysts or their 
contents. They have been noted by Brumpt as occurring in AL;des aegypti infected with 
Plasmodium gallinaceum. A similar ‘ chitinisation’ causes the tubes left by the mites 
described above. 
Mosquitoes as parasites and vectors of parasitic diseases. Larvae of Culexpipiens have been 
recorded as being passed with human faeces and so considered as parasites (E. Blanchard, 
1890; Tosatto, 189 1). See also Ficalbi (189 1) and R. Blanchard (1901), who dispose of such 
a view. 
A case almost amounting to mild parasitism is that of mosquitoes of the genus Harpa- 
gomyia which obtain food from ants which they stroke to cause them to make the necessary 
disgorgement and for which purpose they have a markedly specialised proboscis (Jacobson, 
1911; Edwards, 1932). 
In addition to being parasitised in the strict sense mosquitoes are pre-eminent as inter- 
mediate hosts of parasites causing disease in man and aniinals; see section on role in 
disease, pp. 77-84. 
REFERENCES 
(a) LIFE HISTORY 
ADRIEN, C. (1918). Dengue Mkditerrankenne observke g l’ile Rouad (Syrie). Arch. Mk’d. Pharm. 
Nav. 105, 275-307. 
ARAGAO, DE B. H. (1939). Mosquitoes and yellow fever virus. Mem. Inst. Usw. Cruz, 34,565~81. 
BOULFORD, G. (1908). Le Stegomyia fasciata au Soudan franCais. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 1, 
454-9. 
CHARFUER, H. (1924). La Stegomyia fasciata dans la rkgion de Tanger (Maroc). Bull. Sot. Path. 
Exot. 17, 137-42. 
COSSIO, V. (193 1). Observations sobre al Agdes aegypti (Stegomyia) mosquito de la febbre amarilla 
en Montevideo. Bol. Cons. Nat. Hig. Uruguay, 23, 1664. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 19,230. 
CREAC’H, P. (1947). Notes succinctes sur Stegomyia fasciata en saison fraiche 1938-9 k Fort- 
Lamy (Tchad). Encyc. Ent. B 11, Dipt. x, 152-4. 
GUTZEVICH, A. V. (1931). The reproduction and development of the yellow fever mosquito under 
experimental conditions (in Russian). Mug. Parasit. Leningrad, 2, 35-54. Abstract in Rev. 
Appl. Ent. 21, 2. 
69 
BIONOMICAL 
KOROVITZKII, L. K. and ARTEMENKO, V. D. (1933). Zur Biologie des AL;des aegypti. Mag. Parasit. 
Leningrad, 2, 400-6 (in Russian). Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 22, 78. 
MACDONALD, W. W. (1956). Aedes aegypti in Malaya. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 385-98. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). La fievre jaune. Rapports de la Mission 
francaise. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 17, 665-731. 
MATHIS, M. (1938). Influence de la nutrition larvaire sur la fecondite du Stegomyia (Aedes 
aegypti). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 31, 640-6. 
(6) BREEDING PLACES 
ADERS, W. M. (1917). Insects injurious to man and stock in Zanzibar. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 391-401. 
ALLAN, W. (1935). Rep. Med. San. Dept. Sierra Leone for 1934, pp. 28-32. 
BALFOUR, A. (1921). Mosquitoes breeding in saline waters. Bull. Ent. Res. 12, 29-34. 
BANA, F. D. (1936). A practical way of dealing with Aedes aegypti (Stegomyia fasciata) mosquito 
breeding in country craft. Indian Med. Gaz. 71, 79-80. 
BAQUE, B. and KIEFFER, J. J. (1923). Existence de Stegomyia fasciata au Sahara Q 500 kilometres 
de la c&e Mediterraneenne. Arch. Inst. Pasteur, Afr. Nord, 3, 169-71. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). See references in chapter II (a-b), p. 224. 
BOYCE, R. (1910). The distribution and prevalence of yellow fever in West Africa. J. Trop. Med. 
(Hyg.) 13, 357-62. 
CARTER, H. R. (1924). Preferential and compulsory breeding places of Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti 
and their limits. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 18, 493-503. 
CHABRILLAT, M. (1934). Note sur la fievre de trois jours. BUZZ. Sot. Path. Exot. 27, 762-6. 
CHENEVEAU, R. (1934). Note sur les trous de crabes & Anecho (Togo). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 27, 
590-3. 
CLARE, H. L. (1916). Report to Surgeon-General 1914-15. Trinidad and Tobago Count. Pap. 
no. 154. Abstract in Rev. AppZ. Ent. 4, 69. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1922). Final report on the control of yellow fever in Merida, Yucatan, Mexico. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 2, 487-96. 
COSSIO, V. (1931). See under (a). 
DALZIEL, J. M. (1920). Crab-holes, trees and other mosquito sources in Lagos. Bull. Ent. Res. 11, 
247-70. 
DARLING, S. T. (1910). Factors in the transmission and prevention of malaria in the Panama 
Canal Zone. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 4, 179-223. 
DRAKE-BROCKMAN, R. E. (1913). Some notes on Stegomyia fasciata in the coast towns of British 
Somaliland. J. Lond. Sch. Trop. Med. 2, 166-9. 
DUNN, L. H. (1927). Tree-holes and mosquito breeding in West Africa. Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 
139-44. 
DUTTON, J. E. (1903). Report of the malaria expedition to the Gambia. Thomp. Yates Labs. Rep. 
5. And as Lpool Sch. Trop. Med. Mem. x. 
GARNHAM, P. C. C., HARPER, J. A. and HIGHTON, R. B. (1946). The mosquitoes of the Kaimosi 
Forest, Kenya Colony, with special reference to yellow fever. BUZZ. Ent. Res. 36, 473-96. 
GORDON, R. M. (1922). Note on the bionomics of Stegomyia calopus Meigen in Brazil. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 16, 425-39. 
GRAHAM, W. M. (1911). Results obtained from a monthly examination of the native domestic 
receptacles at Lagos, Southern Nigeria in 1910-11. Bull. Ent. Res. 2, 127-39. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1945). On the mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. I. Description of 
Bwamba with special reference to mosquito ecology. Proc. ZooZ. Sot. Lond. 115, 1-13. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1948). The mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. VI. Mosquito breeding in 
plant axils. Bull. Ent. Res. 39, 185-202. 
HADDOW, A. J., VAN SOMEREN, E. C. C., LUMSDEN, W. H. R., HARPER, J. 0. and GILLETT, J. D. 
(1951). The mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. VIII. Records of occurrence behaviour 
and habitat. Bull. Ent. Res. 42, 207-38. 
HAMLYN-HARRIS, R. (1927). Notes on the breeding places of two mosquitoes in Queensland. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 17, 411-14. 
70 
REFERENCES 
HAWORTH, W. E. (1922). A new breeding place for mosquitoes. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 
16, 201. 
HORNE, J. H. (1913). Notes on distribution and habits of Stegomyia mosquitoes in Madras. 
Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Mal. Comm. Madras 19I2, pp. 197-9. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (19 13). Stegomyia fasciata. Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Mal. Comm. Madras 1912, 
p. 205. 
INGRAM, A. (1919). The domestic breeding mosquitoes of the Northern Territories of the Gold 
Coast. Bull. Ent. Res. 10, 47-58. 
JAMES, S. P., DA SILVA, W. T. and ARNDT, E. W. (1914). Report on a mosquito survey of Colombo 
and the practicability of reducing Stegomyia and some other mosquitoes in the sea-port. 
Government Record Office, Colombo. 
JONES, H. L. (1925). Report of the Health Depart for year ending 30 June 1922. Northern 
Territory Australia: Rep. Adminstr. 1921-2, pp. 18-20. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 13, 145. 
LESTER, A. R. (1927). The coconut palm: its potentialities in providing breeding places for 
mosquitoes. .J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.) 30, 137-45. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1947). General observations on mosquitoes in relation to yellow fever in the Anglo- 
Egyptian Sudan. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, 543-66. 
LISTON, W. G. and AKULA, T. G. (1913). A Stegomyia survey of the City and Island of Bombay. 
Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Mal. Comm. Madras 1912, pp. 187-8. 
LUTZ, A. and MACHADO, A. (1915). Viajem pelo rio S. Francisco etc. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 7, 
5-50. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1922). The effect of saline solutions and sea water on Stegomyia fasciata. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 15, 377-80. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. and INGRAM, A. (1916). The domestic mosquitoes of Accra. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 
162. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1921). The influence of the hydrogen-ion concentration in the develop- 
ment of mosquito larvae. Parasitology, 13, 348-51. 
MHASKAR, K. S. (1913). Stegomyia survey of Karachi. Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Mal. Comm. Madras 
1912, pp. 189-92. 
RIGOLLOT, S. (1927). A propos de la prophylaxie de la fikvre jaune & la CGte Occidentale d’Afrique. 
Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 20, 859-65. 
RIQUEAU (1929). Les trous de crabes, gites & larves. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 22, 175-9. 
RUDOLFS, W. and LACKEY, J. B. (1929). The composition of water and mosquito breeding. Amer. 
J. Hyg. 9, 160-80. 
SHANNON, R. C. (1931). The environment and behaviour of some Brazilian mosquitoes. Proc. 
Ent. Sot. Wash. 33, l-27. 
SOPER, F. L., WILSON, D. B., LIMA, S. and ANTUNES, W. S. (1943). The Organisation of Permanent 
Nation-wide anti-Aedes aegypti Measures in Brazil. Rockefeller Foundation, New York. 
STEPHANIDES, T. (1937). The mosquitoes of the island of Corfu, Greece. Bull. Ent. Res. 28,405-7. 
TEESDALE, C. (1941). Pineapple and banana plants as sources of Aedes mosquitoes. E. Afr. Med. 
J. 18, 260-7. 
THOMAS, H. W. (1910). The sanitary conditions and diseases prevailing in Manaos, North Brazil, 
1905-1909. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 4, 7-55. 
WANSON, M. (1935). Note sur les trous de crabes, gites larvaires. Ann. Sot. Belge M&d. Trop. 5, 
575-85. 
(C) NATURAL ENEMIES 
ATKINSON, M. ( 1909). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.) 12, 17. 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). Rep. Yell. Fev. Comm., London, 3, 1-191. 
BARBER, M. A. and KING, C. E. (1927). Publ. Hlth Rep., Wash., 42, 3189-93. 
BARBER, M. A. and KING, C. E. (1928). Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 21, 429. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). See reference in chapter II (a-b), p. 146. 
BATES, H. W. (1863). A Naturalist on the River Amazon. London. (6th ed. 1891.) 
BEDFORD, G. A. H. (1919). U.S. Afr. Dept. Agric. 5th and 6th Ann. Rep. Vet. Res. pp. 739-43, 
Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 8, 9. 
7= 
BIONOMICAL 
BENTLEY, C. A. (1910). J. Bombay Nat. Hist. Sot. 20, 392-422. 
BRITTON, W. E. and VIERECK, H. L. (1905). 4th Rep. State Ent. Connecticut Agric. Exp. Sta. for 
1904, pp. 253-310. 
BRUMPT, E. (1925). Ann. Parasit. Hum. Comp. 3, 403-l 1. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1927). Mem. Lond. Sch. Hyg. Trop. Med. no. 1. 
CARTER, H. F. (1919). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 12, 289-302. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1906). Sci. Mem. 06 San. Med. Dept., Govt. India, no. 25. 
COMBES, P. (1896). Rev. Scient. (4), 6, 751-3. 
COVELL, G. (1941). Malaria Control by Anti-mosquito Measures. Ed. 2. Thacker and Co., London. 
DARWIN, C. (1875). Insectivorous Plants, pp. 408-9, 430. 
D’EMMEREZ DE CHARMOY, D. (1902). Rep. MaZ. Enq. Comm., Mus. Desjardins. Port Louis, 
Mauritius. 
DEMPWOLFF (1904). 2. Hyg. ZnfektKr. 47, 81-132. 
DERIVAUX, R. C. (19 16). U.S. Publ. Hlth Rep. 31, 1228-30. 
DRAKE-BROCKMAN, R. E. (1913). See under (b). 
DUFOUR, L. (1864). Ann. Sot. Ent. France 1864, p. 633. 
EDITORIAL (1916). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.) 19, 34. 
EYSELL, E. (1924). Die Stechmucken. In Mense’s Handb. TropenKr. ed. 3, 1, 176-303. 
FERTON, C. (1901). Ann. Sot. Ent. France 1901, pp. 83-145. 
FOLEY, F. H. and YVERNAULT, A. (1908). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 1, 172-3. 
GALLI-VALERIO, B. and ROCHAZ DE JONGH, J. (1908). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 46, 134. 
GALLI-VALERIO, B. and ROCHAZ DE JONGH, J. (1909). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 49, 557. 
GARNHAM, P. C. C., HARPER, J. 0. and HIGHTON, J. (1946). See under (b). 
GASANOV, A. P. (1938). Med. Parasit., Lening., 7, 617. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 27, 76. 
GILES, G. M. (1902). A Handbook of Gnats or Mosquitoes. Ed. 2. John Bale Sons and Danielsson, 
London, p. 149. 
GORDON, R. E. (1922). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 16, 425-39. 
GREEN, E. E. (1905). SpoZ. ZeyZ. 2, 159-64. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1942). Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 17, 71-98. 
HAMLYN-HARRIS, R. (1929). Proc. R. Sot. Queensl. 41, 23-38. 
HAMLYN-HARRIS, R. (1930). BUZZ. Ent. Res. 24, 159. 
HART, J. H. (1906). Bull. Misc. Inform., Trinidad Bot. Dept. no. 50, p. 37. 
HARVEY, F. L. (1880). Amer. Nat. 14, 896. 
HAYES, T. H. (1930). U.S. Nav. Med. Bull. 28, 196222. 
HEARLE, E. (1926). Canad. Nat. Res. Council Rep. 17, l-94. 
HERMS, W. B. and GRAY, H. F. (1940). Mosquito Control. Commonwealth Fund, New York 
and Oxford Univ. Press, London. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1934). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.) 37, 129-34, 145-50. With bibliography. 
HOFFMANN, W. E. (1927). Lingnaan Agric. Rev. 4, 77-93. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 15, 233. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1910). U.S. Dept. Agric., Bur. Ent. BUZZ. 88, 1-126. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912). The Mosquitoes of N. and C. America and the 
West Indies. Carnegie Institute, Washington. Vol. I, pp. 156-79. 
JACKSON, N. (1953). Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. (A), 28, 10-12. 
JENNINGS, A. H. (1908). Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 10, 61-2. 
KNAB, F. In HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB (1912), p. 170. 
KRAUSE, E. (1887). Kosmos, Lwdw, 1, 80. 
LAIRD, M. (1947). Trans. R. Sot. N.Z. 76, 453-76. 
LAMBORN, R. H. et al. (1890). Lamborn Prize Essays. New York. 
LEON, N. (1910). ZbZ. Bakt. Abt. I, Orig. 57, 148-54. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1942). Sudan Notes, 25, 141. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 31, 214. 
LISCHETTI, A. B. (19 19). Physis, B. Aires, 4, 59 l-5. 
LISTON, W. G. (1901). Indian Med. Gaz. 36, 361-6. 
MCCOOK, H. C. In LAMBORN, R. H. (1890). 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1923). Bull. Ent. Res. 13, 403. 
72 
REFERENCES 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1920). J. R. Army Med. Cps, 34, 248-50. 
MARCHOUX, SALIMBENI and SIMOND. See under (a). 
MATHESON, R. and HINMAN, E. H. (1928). Amer. J. Hyg. 8, 279-92. 
MATHESON, R. and HINMAN, E. H. ( 1929). Amer. J. Hyg. 9, 188-9 1. 
MATHESON, R. and HINMAN, E. H. (1931). Amer. J. Hyg. 14, 99-108. 
MATHIS, C. and BERLAND, L. (1933). C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 197, 271-2. 
MATHIS, M. (1938). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 33, 301-5. 
MORGAN, H. C. and COTTON, E. C. (1908). Science, n.s. 27, 28-30. 
NICHOLS, L. (1912). Bull. Em. Res. 3, 257. 
O’CONNELL, M. D. (1912). J. R. Army Med. Cps, 19, 491-3. 
OSTERHOUT. Cited in HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB (1912). 
PAINE, R. W. (1934). Bull. Em. Res. 25, l-32. 
PAIVA, C. A. (1910). Rec. Indian Mus. 5, 187-90. 
PRUTHI, S. (1928). Ind. J. Med. Res. 16, 153-7. 
PURDY, M. S. (1920). Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 35, 44, 2556-70. 
SAILER, R. J. and LIENK, S. E. (1954). Mosquito News, 14, 14-16. 
SEGUY, E. (1923). Histoire naturelle des moustiques de France. Paul Lechevalie, Paris. 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1920). Ind. J. Med. Res. 8, 3 19. 
SHANNON, R. C. (1929). Encyc. Ent. B 11, Dipt. 5, 155-62 (in article by C. P. Alexander). 
SHANNON, R. C., BURKE, A. W. and DAVIS, N. C. (1930). Amer. J. Trap. Med. 10, 145-50. 
SMITH, J. B. (1910). Ent. News, 21, 437-41. 
S~EZEY, 0. H. (1931). Rept. Comm. Expt. Sta., Hawaiian Sugar PI. Assoc. Entom. Sect. for 
1929-30, pp. 23-30. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901). Mono. Culicidae, 1, 73. 
UNDERWOOD, W. L. (1903). Pop. Sci. Mon. 1903, p. 466. 
VIERECK, H. L. (1904). (In SMITH, J. B. Rep. N. J. State Agric. Exp. Sta. pp. 399-404.) 
WAHLBERG, H. (1847). ofvers. Vetensk.Accad. Forh., Stockh., 4, 257-9. 
WATERSTON, J. (1918). Bull. Ent. Res. 9, 1-12. 
WILSON, H. C. (1914). Ind. J. Med. Res. 1, 691-701. 
YAMADA, S. (1927). Kontyu, 2, 143-54. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 16, 94. 
YOUNG, C. J. (1921). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 15, 301-8. 
(d) PARASITES 
ALESSANDRINI, G. (1909). Malaria, Lpz., 1, 133-7. 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). Rep. Yell. Fev. Comm., London, 3, 1-191. 
BALFOUR, A. (1923). J. R. Army Med. Cps, 40, 122-7. 
BATES, M. (1949). The Natural History of Mosquitoes. Macmillan and Co., New York. 
BLANCHARD, E. (1890). Trait& de zoologie medicale, 2, 497-8. 
BLANCHARD, R. (1901). Bull. Sot. Zool. France, 16, 72-3. 
BOYD, J. E. M. (1922). J. R. Army Med. Cps, 38, 459-60. 
BRAUN, A. (1855). Algarum unicelliularium genera nova et minus cognita. Leipzig. 
BRESSLAU, E. VON and BUSCHKIEL, E. (1919). Biol. Zbl. 19, 325-35. 
BRUMPT, E. (1936). P&is de parasitologie. Ed. 5. Masson et Cie, Paris. 
BRUMPT, E. (1938). Ann. Parasit. Hum. Comp. 16, 153-8. 
CANNING, E. V. (1957). Trans. R. Sot. Trap. Med. Hyg. 51, 8. 
CAUSEY, 0. R. (1939). Amer. J. Hyg. 29, Sect. C, 79-8 1; Sect. D, 13 l-2 ; 30, Sect. D, 69-71. 
CHATTERJEE, G. C. (1901). Indian Med. Gaz. 16, 371-2. 
CHORINE, V. and BARANOFF, N. (1929). C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 101, 1025-6. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). Rep. Mal. Comm. R. Sot. (4), London. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1952). Riv. Parassit. 13, 21-8. 
COLAS-BELCOUR, J. (1954). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 4, 236-7. 
CORRADETTI, A. (1937). Riv. Parassit. 1, 39-50. 
COUCH, J. N. (1945). J. Elisha Mitchell Sci. Sot. 61, 123-36. 
COUCH, J. N. and DODGE, H. R. (1947). J. Elisha Mitchell Sci. Sot. 63, 69-79. 
73 
BIONOMICAL 
DURHAM, M. E. and MYERS, W. (1902). Lpool Sch. Trop. Med. Mem. VII. 
DYE, L. (1905). Arch. Parasit. 9, 5-77. 
DYE, W. H. (1924). J. R. Army Med. Cps, 42, 87-102. 
ECKSTEIN, F. (1922). Zbl. Bakt. (Orig.) 88, 128-35. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1922). Bull. Em. Res. 13, 161-7. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1932). Genera Insectorum. Brussels. Fast. 194. Fam. Culicidae, p. 92. 
FENG, LAN CHOU (1930). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 24, 361-2. 
FENG, LAN CHOU (1933a). Lingnan Sci. J. 12, Suppl. 28. 
FENG, LAN CHOU (19333). Chinese Med. J. 47, 168-78. 
FENG, LAN CHOU and HOEPPLI, R. (1933). Chinese Med. J. 47, 1191-g. 
FICALBI, E. (1891). Quoted by Blanchard, E. (1890). 
GALLI-VALERIO, B. and ROCHAZ DE JONGH, J. (1905). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 38, 174-7. 
GALLI-VALERIO, B. and ROCHAZ DE JONGH, J. (1905). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 40, 630-3. 
GALLI-VALERIO, B. and ROCHAZ DE JONGH, J. (1907). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 43, 470. 
GANAPATI, P. N. and TATE, P. (1949). Parasitology, 39, 291-4. 
GENDRE, E. (1909). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 2, 106-8. 
GODOY, A. and PINTO, C. (1923). Brazil-med. 37, 29-33. 
GROS, H. (1904). C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 56, 56-7. 
HESSE, E. (1918). C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 166, 569-72. 
HODGES, A. (1902). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 5, 293-300. 
HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB. See under (c). 
IYENGAR, M. 0. T. (1930). Trans. F.E.A.T.M. 7th Congr. Calcutta, 3, 128-42. 
IYENGAR, M. 0. T. (1935). Parasitology, 27, 440-9. 
IYENGAR, M. 0. T. (1938). Proc. Nat. Inst. Sci. India, 4, 237-9. 
JACOBSON, E. (1911). Tijdschr. Ent. 54, 157-61. 
JAFFE, J. (1907). Arch. Protistenk. 9, 100-7. 
JASWANT SINGH, RAMAKRISHNAN, S. P. and DAVID, A. (1950). Indian J. Malar. 4, 189-92. 
JENKINS, D. W. and WEST, A. S. (1954). Mosquito News, 14, 138-43. 
JOHNSON, H. P. (1903). Rep. Ent. Dep. N. J. Agric. Exp. Sta. for 1902, Appendix, pp. 559-93. 
JOYEUX, C. (1918). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 11, 530-47. 
QILIN, D. (1921a). Parasitology, 13, 216-24. 
KEILIN, D. (1921 b). Parasitology, 13, 225-34. 
KUDO, R. (1921). J. Morph. 35, 153-93. 
KUDO, R. (1922). J. Parasit. 8, 70-9. 
KUDO, R. (1924a). Illinois BioZ. Monogr. 9, nos. 2, 3. 
KUDO, R. (1924b). Arch. Protistenk. 49, 147-62. 
KUDO, R. (1924c). J. Parasit. 11, 84-9. 
KUDO, R. (1925). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 96, 428-40. 
LAIRD, M. (1946). Trans. R. Sot. N.Z. 76, 158-61. 
LAIRD, M. (1947). Trans. R. Sot. N. 2. 76, 47 1. 
LAIRD, M. (1956). J. Parasit. 42, 53-5. 
LAMBORN, W. A. (1921). Parasitology, 13, 213-15. 
LANGERON, M. (1929). Ann. Parasit. Hum. Comp. 7, 107-l 1. 
LAVERAN, A. (1902). C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 54, 233-5. 
LEGER, L. (1902). C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 54, 354-6. 
LEGER, L. and DUBOSCQ, 0. (1903). C. R. Assoc. Franc. Av. Sci. Sess. 3 1, 1902, pp. 703-4. 
LEON, N. (1924). Ann. Parasit. Hum. Camp. 2, 211-13. 
LISTON, G. L. (1901). Indian Med. Gaz. 36, 364. 
LUTZ, A. and SPLENDORE, A. (1908). ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 46, 311-15, 652. 
MACARTHUR, W. P. (1922). J. R. Army Med. Cps, 38, 83-92. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1916). Rep. Accra Lab. for year 1915, pp. 76-9. Abstract in Rev. AppZ. Ent. 5, 
47. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). Rep. Accra Lab. for year 1916, pp. 67-75. Abstract in Rev. AppZ. Ent. 
6, 16. 
74 
REFERENCES 
MANALANG, C. (1930). Philipp. J. Sci. 42, 279-80. 
MARCHOUX, SALIMBENI and SIMOND. See under (a). 
MARSHALL, J. F. and STALEY, J. (1929). Parasitology, 21, 158-60. 
MARTINI, E. (1920). Arch. Schifi.- u. Tropenhyg. 24, Beih. 1. 
MARTIRANO, F. (1901). Zbl. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 30, 849-52. 
MASSEGUIN, A. and PALINACCI, A. (1954). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 47, 391-2. 
MASSEGUIN, A., PALINACCI, A. and BRUMPT, V. (1954). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 47, 234-6. 
MATHIS, C. (19 14). C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 77, 297-300. 
MATHIS, M. and BAFFET, 0. (1934). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 27, 435-7. 
MISSIROLI, A. (1928). Riv. di Malarial. 7, l-3. 
MISSIROLI, A. (1929). Riv. di Malarial. 8, 393-400. 
MONTOUSSIS, K. (1929). Arch. Schij%- u. Tropenhyg. 33, 330-3. 
MUSPRATT, J. ( 1945). J. Ent. Sot. S. Afr. 8, 13-20. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1946). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 40, 10-17. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1947). J. Ent. Sot. S. Afr. 10, 131. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1947). Parasitology, 38, 107-10. 
NOC, F. (1920). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 13, 672-9. 
Not, F. and STEVENEL, L. (1913). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 6, 708-10. 
NOLLER, W. (1917). Arch. Schzjs.- u. Tropenhyg. 21, 53-94. 
NOLLER, W. (1920). Arch. Protistenk. 41, 169-88. 
NOVY, F. G., MACNEAL, W. J. and TORREY, H. N. (1907). J. Infect. Dis. 4, 223-76. 
PARKER, H. B., BEYER, G. E. and POTHIER, 0. L. (1903). Yell. Fev. Inst. Bull. no. 13. 
PATTON, W. S. (1907). Brit. Med. J. 2, 78-80. 
PATTON, W. S. (19 12). Sci. Mem. Ofi Med. San. Dept., Govt. India (n.s.), no. 57. 
PATTON, W. S. and CRAGG, F. W. (1913). Textbook of Medical Entomology. Christian Lit. Sot. 
for India, London and Madras. 
PERRONCITO, E. (1900). G. Accad. Med. Torino, (4), 6, 387-8. 
PETTIT, E. H. (1903). Michigan Agric. Exp. Sta. Special Bull. no. 17. 
RAMAKRISHNAN, S. P., DAVID, A. and NAIR, C. P. (1956). Indian J. Malar. 10, 3 13-l 5. 
RAY, H. (1933). Parasitology, 25, 392-5. 
ROSS, R. (1895). Trans. S. Indian Branch Brit. Med. Ass. 6, 334-50. 
Ross, R. (1898). Trans. S. Indian Branch Brit. Med. Ass. 9 (reprinted Ind. Med. Gaz. 1898). 
ROSS, R. (1906). J. Hyg., Camb., 6, 101-9. 
RUGE, R. (1903). Festschr. R. Koch, p. 174. 
SAMBON, L. W. (1922). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 25, 170-85. 
SCHAUDINN, F. (1904). Arb. GesundhAmt., Berlin, 20, 387-439. 
SCHOO, H. J. M. (1902); Ned. Tijdschr. Geneesk. 1, 283. 
SBGUY, E. (1923). Histoire naturelle des moustiques de France. Paris, pp. 45-5 1. 
SELLARDS, A. W. and SILER, J. F. (1928). Amer. J. Trop. Med. 8, 299-304. 
SERGENT, ED. and ET. (1904). C. R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 56, 100-2. 
SERGENT, ED. and ET. (1906). C. R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 60, 291-3. 
SINTON, J. A. (1917). Ind. J. Med. Res. 5, 1924. 
SINTON, J. A. and SHUTE, P. G. (1939). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 42, 125-6. 
SMITH, J. B. (1903). Rep. Ent. Dep. N.J. Agric. Exp. Sta. for 1902, pp. 509-93. 
SOPARKAR, M. B. (1918). Znd. J. Med. Res. 5, 512-15. 
SPEER, A. J. ( 1927). Hyg. Lab. Bull. Wash. no. 146. 
STEINHAUS, E. A. (1946). Insect Microbiology. Comstock Publ. Co., Ithaca, New York. 
STEVENSON, A. C. and WENYON, C. M. (1915). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 18, 196. 
STILES, C. W. (1903). Hyg. La. Publ. Hlth, Marine Hosp. Serv. Bull. 13, pp. 15-17. 
THAXTER, R. (1888). Mem. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 4, 133-201. 
THOMPSON, J. G. and ROBERTSON, A. (1925). J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.): 28, 419-24. 
TOSATTO, E. (1891). Insect Lzfe, 4, 285. 
UCHIDA and MIYAZAKI (1935). Proc. Imp. Acad. Japan, 11, 73-76. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1921). Tijdschr. verglijk. Geneesk. 6, no. 4. 
75 
BIONOMICAL 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1922). Tijdschr. verglijk. Geneesk. 7, no. 25. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1925). Arch. Sch$s.- u. Tropenhyg. 29, Beih. 1, 396-400. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (193Oa). Zbl. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.), 117, 103-12. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (19306). Acta leidensia, 5, 238-53. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1954). .I. Parasit. 40, 271-9. 
VANEY, C. and CONTE. Referred to by DYE (1905). 
VISWANATHAN, D. E. and BHATT, H. R. (1948). J. Nat. Mal. Sot. (India,) 7, 207-l 1. 
WALKER, A. J. (1938). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 32, 231-41. 
WALLACE, F. G. (1943). J. Parasit. 29, 196-205. 
WENYON, C. M. (1911). Parasitology, 4, 273-344. 
WENYON, C. M. (1926). Protozoology. Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, London. 
76 
IV 
MEDICAL 
(a) RELATION TO DISEASE 
As the chief vector of yellow fever Agdes aegypti has long been notorious as the ‘yellow 
fever mosquito ‘. Nor is this its only role as a disease transmitter, for it is also the chief 
vector of dengue; besides being known or suspected of conveying some other diseases of 
man, it is the chief agent in several important virus diseases of animals and the vector of 
DiroJilaria in dogs. 
YELLOW FEVER 
Following experimental proof by Reed and his collaborators A. aegypti has now for some 
fifty years been recognised as the chief vector of yellow fever, at least in its urban form. 
A short account of researches leading to this discovery has already been given in chapter I. 
A large literature has since grown up giving the results of countless researches on its epi- 
demiology, the behaviour of the virus, the bionomics of its vectors and other aspects of 
the disease. It is not possible to give here a detailed account of yellow fever in all these 
relations, but the main facts regarding its epidemiology and the part played in this by 
A. aegypti and some other mosquitoes may be noted. 
For an account of early work on the epidemiology and control of yellow fever see Boyce 
(1909) and Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12). A good later account of the disease is that by 
Brumpt (1936) and a review of jungle yellow fever is given by Bates (1949). A very complete 
account dealing with cultivation of the virus and other aspects is that by Strode (1951) 
incorporating articles by various authorities describing the work carried out during the 
previous thirty years by the International Health Division of the Rockefeller Foundation 
(see also review and abstract of this work by Findlay, 1952). 
Yellow fever in the past was chiefly known from outbreaks and epidemics in seaports 
and towns in tropical America, sometimes occurring as far north as Philadelphia, and as 
cases on ships or in harbours frequented by shipping from this source. 
It is now known that it also occurs as an endemic disease not only in America but 
throughout a large part of Africa, two forms of the disease being recognised, namely the 
urban and the sylvan form. A third form, rural yellow fever, has been given by Kirk (1943) 
for certain types of its occurrence. 
Urban yellow fever occurs as the typical form of the disease in epidemics in towns or 
similar situations, the vector being A. aegypti and infection being from man to man. It was 
this form in which yellow fever occurred as epidemics in America and against which 
control measures were mainly directed. Many references to such outbreaks and the 
measures carried out in their control and prevention are given by Carter, Connor and 
others in the literature. Outbreaks of the urban type with a similar epidemiology are also 
known to occur in Africa. Findlay and Davey (1936) refer to an epidemic in the Gambia 
in 1934, and that there have been others in other parts of Africa since, and state that 
77 
MEDICAL 
at least one of these was similar to the American outbreaks with A. aegypti as the principal 
vector. 
Sylvan or forest yellow fever is largely endemic in character and evidenced chiefly by 
presence of immunity in the indigenous population, which may sometimes be as high as 
60 per cent or more. In this form A. aegypti is not the vector, or takes but little part, and 
infection is not primarily derived from man. Sylvan yellow fever is present throughout 
large parts of tropical America in the forest regions and throughout a large part of Africa 
south of the Sahara. The endemic area in Africa as given by the World Health Organisation 
(1952) is that lying between the parallels of 15” N. and 10” S. with an outlying area in 
Northern Rhodesia (Barotse Province). The disease is not known in any form east of the 
African continent. 
The rural form is a term usefully applied where outbreaks of a mixed character occur, 
A. aegypti often taking some part, such as are met with in some African areas. As noted 
later much has still to be worked out regarding the epidemiology in the sylvan and rural 
forms. 
In America it was at first the urban form that constituted ‘yellow fever’ and the forest 
form largely became recognised only as control measures eliminated or greatly controlled 
the urban epidemics. It then became evident that there existed the forest form and that 
urban epidemics commonly started from infection introduced by cases that had contracted 
the disease in the forest, the epidemic then being carried on as a typical urban outbreak by 
A. aegypti (see Bauer, 1928; Soper et al. 1933; Soper, 1938; and Aragao, 1939, who gives 
an interesting description of such conditions in Brazil. See also description of the situation 
by Sawyer, 1942). 
Recognition of sylvan yellow fever in Africa had a somewhat different history. Though 
yellow fever had been recorded from West Africa, there was in the early stages of research 
upon this disease no realisation of its extent and importance in Africa, or even certainty 
of its existence. Boyce (19 lo), however, clearly showed that yellow fever had long been, 
and still was, present in West Africa. Later observations not only confirmed Boyce’s 
findings, but showed that throughout a large part of tropical Africa and extending far to 
the east in that continent there existed in the indigenous population a considerable percent- 
age of those showing immunity to the disease, indicating that yellow fever must quite 
recently have been present, if not still so, over large areas where its existence had never 
before been suspected. Further it became clear that the epidemiology of the disease under 
these conditions was quite different from that of the urban epidemics. That the presence of 
immunity over so great an area did in fact indicate existence of the disease was very clearly 
shown shortly after this discovery by the occurrence in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, far to 
the east, of an epidemic of yellow fever in which A. aegypti was not an important vector 
(Kirk). Soon observations from Uganda, Kenya and other areas established with certainty 
the wide occurrence of sylvan yellow fever. (See Beeuwkes, Bauer and Mahaffy (1930).) 
The above findings in America and Africa greatly stimulated research, which has 
continued with increasing intensity up to the present time. Such research has included the 
determination of areas where immunity exists in indigenous populations, the species of 
mosquito in which the virus can be demonstrated in wild-caught specimens, or which can 
be shown to transmit the disease experimentally, the forest animals that provide the source 
of infection and how infection of man is brought about, as also the whole question of the 
nature and properties of the virus and how these may be made use of in man’s protection. 
78 
RELATION TO DISEASE 
Essential to all such work has been the fact that monkeys, as first noted by Stokes, Bauer 
and Hudson (192Q were susceptible to the disease and could be used experimentally in 
research on the virus and in other ways. Another important finding, upon which much of 
modern research has depended, has been the discovery that mice were susceptible and 
could be used, not only as a means of ascertaining the presence of the virus, but also as a 
test for the existence of immunity in man or animals, the blood of such humans or animals 
as possessed immunity being capable of preventing the disease in mice inoculated with the 
virus. It is this last test, known as the ‘mouse protection test’, that has been so extensively 
used in mapping the endemic area of yellow fever both in America and in Africa. It also 
enables the presence of immunity in animals suspected to be sources of the virus to be 
determined. The susceptibility of mice to infection with the virus, as will be seen later, also 
enters largely into the preparation of suitable strains of the virus for use in protection. 
Various techniques are given in the literature for determining the presence of the virus 
in mosquitoes. Briefly the basis of such procedure is that the mosquitoes are ground up in 
a diluent and the product after filtration injected intra-cerebrally or otherwise into mice 
(see Waddell, 1945 ; Smithburn and Haddow, 1946; Smithburn, Haddow and Lumsden, 
1949; Ross and Gillett, 1950). The following records of recovery of the virus from wild- 
caught forest mosquitoes in America are given by Bates: 
Haemagogus spegazinnii 17 occasions 
AL;des leucocelaenus 3 occasions 
Haemagogus lucifer and/or equinus 1 occasion 
88 various Sabethine mosquitoes 1 occasion 
In Africa Lumsden (1955), summarising results to date, notes that, though many species of 
mosquito have been shown capable of transmitting yellow fever virus experimentally, only 
three have been incriminated in the field in Africa. These are : 
Acdes aegyp t i Beeuwkes and Hayne (1931), Taylor (1951). 
A. simpsoni Mahaffy, Smithburn, Jacobs and Gillett (1942). 
A. africanus Smithburn, Haddow and Lumsden (1949). 
Besides these proved vectors, a number of species in American and African forests have 
been shown capable of transmitting yellow fever virus experimentally and others, though 
incapable of conveying the virus, have been shown to harbour the virus when fed on 
infected material. Lists of such species will be found given under ‘yellow fever ’ by Manson- 
Bahr (1954). A list of African species classified as above is also given by Muspratt 
(1956). Most of the species shown able to transmit experimentally are in the genus A&‘des 
or (in America) Haemagogus. But Eretmapodites chrysogaster and Culex thalassius in 
Africa and Trichoprosopon frontosus in America also have been shown to transmit experi- 
mentally and among those harbouring the virus are species of Psorophora, Taeniorhynchus 
and other genera. Even Culex fatigans has been shown to be capable in some degree of 
transmission (Davis, 1933). 
Of forest animals that may be sources of the virus are especially species of monkey. In 
tropical America it is now known that epidemics occur periodically among the monkeys 
in forest areas, the human disease being a secondary phenomenon to this. In Africa 
baboons have been found sometimes showing immunity and among other primates the 
small African ‘bush-babies’ (Galago) have been suspected of possibly playing a part in 
transmission (Bailey, 1947; Smithburn and Haddow, 1949; Haddow, Dick, Lumsden and 
Smithburn, 195 1). Animals other than primates have also been noted as showing immunity 
79 
MEDICAL 
(Kirk and Haseeb, 1953). Of such animals in Africa Muspratt gives: Hyrax, the red river 
hog, mongoose, genets, and the pottos. Birds (heron, kingfisher) may also show immunity 
(Findlay and Cockburn, 1943). 
A curious feature of the epidemiology of forest yellow fever is that the vertical distri- 
bution of species of mosquito and of the mammalian fauna has been found to be important. 
Thus in the American forests it is especially when trees are felled, bringing down their high- 
level mosquito fauna, that the chief danger of infection arises. In Africa A&Yes africanus 
plays the chief role in maintaining, receiving and transmitting infection in the high-level 
monkey community, though it is A. simpsoni, a frequenter of banana plantations where it 
breeds, that in many areas transmits infection to man. Thus the process envisaged is that 
infected monkeys raiding plantations may be bitten by A. simpsoni, or A. africanus may 
bite man in or near the forest and he in turn give infection to A. simpsoni. Or there are 
other possibilities, much still requiring to be worked out in different areas (see Gillett, 
1951, 1955). 
Studies on the virus have shown that in the mammalian host it is filterable. In the 
crushed vector it has been said not to be (Brumpt, 1936), though presumably it is so in the 
fluid commonly used in testing. According to Davis and Shannon (1930) the virus is 
generally distributed in the body of the mosquito, being obtained from the legs, ovary, 
salivary glands, mid-gut and hind-gut and occasionally in the dejecta. Aragao and Costa- 
Lima (1929) also state that the virus may be present in the faeces and that it may be trans- 
mitted to monkeys through the broken skin. Attempts to transmit by interrupted feeding, 
as also by hereditary transmission through the egg, have given negative results (Philip, 
1929, 1930; Davis and Shannon, 1930; Stokes et al. 1928; Gillett et al. 1950). 
The time of infectivity in cases of yellow fever in man is during some three to four days 
in the height of the fever, but the virus has been isolated up to the eighth day (Macnamara, 
1954). The time required for the mosquito to become infective following feed on an 
infective case depends largely upon the temperature. In A. aegypti at 24-26’ C. Lewis, 
Hughes and Mahaffy (1942) found it to be eight days, but it may be longer. 
An important aspect of virus research has been the developmen: of a safe and effective 
vaccine which can be used in protection. A vaccine 17 D, prepared from virus cultivated 
in chick and mouse medium and which has lost pathogenicity to man, has now been widely 
used (see Theiler and Smith, 1937 ; Smith and Theiler, 1937 ; Strode ; Rivers, 1952). A vaccine 
from virus grown on mouse brain is also in use in some countries (Rivers, 1952; Cannon 
and Dewhurst, 1955). 
An outstanding and curious feature of yellow fever epidemiology is absence of the 
disease from countries to the east of the African continent, in spite of the fact that A. aegypti 
occurs widely and may locally be extremely abundant. It has been considered possible that 
A. aegypti in these countries may not be an efficient vector. That the virus is capable of 
being transmitted by strains from Java has, however, been shown by Dinger, Schuffner, 
Snyders and Swellengnebel(1929), and by Hindle (1930). Hindle (1929) has also shown 
that a strain from India was capable of transmitting experimentally, and recently Gillett 
and Ross (1955) have shown that a strain from Malaya was capable of transmission. 
Whilst A. aegypti plays little part in forest or sylvan yellow fever, it still remains the sole 
vector and cause of urban epidemics and it is the chief agent against which control measures 
are directed, whether against the insect locally or in connection with its possible spread 
through aeroplanes and other means. 
80 
RELATION TO DISEASE 
DENGUE 
Good accounts of the epidemiology of dengue are given by Clelland, Bradley and MacDonald 
(19 18) and by Siler, Hall and Hichens (1926) * A detailed survey of the literature to the 
date of his paper is given by Lumley (1943). 
The disease is widespread and commonly occurs as small or larger epidemics, but is 
stated to be endemic in some areas. In Europe a serious epidemic in Greece in 1928 has 
been very fully described by Cardamatis (1929), and by Blanc and Caminopetros (1930). 
Ekblom (1929) gives a map showing the known distribution of dengue at this time. In 
the Mediterranean, Adrien (1918) describes an epidemic in the island of Rouad (Syria). 
Dengue is stated to be endemic in West Africa by Muspratt and in Eritrea (Spadero, 1952). 
Lewis (1955) notes that dengue was formerly present in Port Sudan and McCarthy and 
Wilson (1948) refer to it as occurring in British East Africa (Kenya), though there have 
been no known epidemics. An outbreak of a dengue-like fever occurred in 1952 at Newala 
(Tanganyika Territory) (Lumsden, 1955) and serious epidemics have occurred in and 
about Durban in 1892, 1926 and 1927, there being in the last outbreak 50,000 cases and 
sixty deaths (Muspratt, 1956). Further to the east, south Asia through the south Pacific 
and Australasia would appear particularly to be an area where dengue is widespread and 
common. It occurs in Madagascar (Legendre, 1918); in parts of India (Barraud, 1928), and 
especially in such places as Calcutta and Madras where A. aegypti is abundant; in the 
Philippine Islands (Siler et al.) ; in New Guinea (Mackerras, 1946) ; in New Caledonia 
(Oman and Christiensen, 1947 ; Perry, 1950) ; in the New Hebrides and in a number of 
islands in the South Pacific (Perry, 1948). In Australia it is recorded by Cleland (1928) as 
occurring in the east to about 100 miles north of Sydney. In western Australia it occurs 
only in the tropical parts such as Broome and Kimberley (Jenkins, 1945). Dengue is 
present also in the New World. Severe epidemics in the past have occurred (Bishopp, 
1923 ; Chandler and Rice, 1923). It was formerly especially prevalent on the Gulf Coast 
and in former times outbreaks occurred as far north as Boston (Chandler, 1925). On the 
whole there is a very definite suggestion in its distribution of a relation to that of A. aegypti. 
A. aegypti is indeed now generally recognised as the usual vector of dengue. Species of 
Culex were at one time thought to be possible vectors (Graham, 1902; Ashburn and Craig, 
1907), but the result of experimental work by many authors has not confirmed this. 
Positive results with Af%es aegypti have been obtained by Cleland, Bradley and MacDonald 
(19 18), by Chandler and Rice (1923), and by Schule (1928). 
Other species of Stegomyia have, however, been incriminated and may act as efficient 
vectors, notably AZdes (Stegomyia) scutellaris which is the vector in New Guinea in areas 
remote from occurrence of A. aegypti and specimens of which transported to Australia 
produced infection in volunteers, results with some other species being negative (Mackerras, 
1946). A. albopictus (Simmons, St John and Reynolds, 1930) and A. hebrideus (Farner and 
Bohart, 1948) have been thought to be vectors. 
Incubation of the disease may be as short as eight days, but is usually eleven to fourteen 
days (Schule). It is infective six to eighteen hours before onset and for three or more days 
after the attack. Mosquitoes become infective eight to ten days from feed and maintain 
the virus for a long period (Schule). As in yellow fever the virus is generally distributed in 
* See also Chandler and Rice (1923), Armstrong (1923, with bibliography), Simmons (193 l), Findlay (1951), 
Muspratt (1956). 
6 81 CH 
MEDICAL 
the tissues of the mosquito (Holt and Kintner, 1931). Mosquitoes can become infective if 
fed on infective blood or macerated mosquitoes (St John, Simmons and Reynolds, 1930). 
Infection is not conveyed, or only with great difficulty, by interrupted feeding or from 
mosquito to mosquito in copulation (Simmons, St John, Holt and Reynolds, 193 1). 
Small animals are susceptible by bite or from injection of crushed mosquito tissue. 
OTHER DISEASES OF MAN AND ANIMALS 
Virus diseases of man. A number of virus diseases in man other than yellow fever and 
dengue have been shown or suspected to be conveyed by mosquitoes, in some of which 
A. aegypti has been shown or suspected to act as vector. Coggleshall(l939) and Milzer 
(1942) record conveyance of the virus of lymphocytic choriomeningitis, a sporadic disease 
of man, by mosquitoes, A. aegypti being infective seven to thirty-eight days after the 
infective feed. Murray Valley encephalitis, which in 1951 caused a serious epidemic in 
Australia, was thought to be mosquito-borne from birds as natural reservoirs. Japanese 
B.- and St Louis encephalitis have also been considered possibly mosquito-borne (Marks, 
1954). 
A virus, West Nile virus, causing disease in children near Cairo has been isolated from 
Culex by Taylor and Hurlbutt (1953) and has been shown by Goldwasser and Davies 
(1953) and by Davies and Yoshpe-Purer (1953, 1954a) to be capable of transmission by 
A. aegypti, wild birds being found to be susceptible and thought to be possible reservoirs 
of the virus in nature (Work, Hurlbutt and Taylor, 1955). 
A human epidemic caused by Venezuelan equine encephalitis in Colombia is recorded by 
Sanmartin-Barberi, Groot and Osarno-Mesa (1955), A. aegypti being found in 687 out 
of 2295 houses, and found infected. 
Altogether no less than seven new viruses isolated from man, animals or mosquitoes are 
listed by Dick (1953) as recorded in 1937-48 from Uganda, namely Bwamba fever, West 
Nile virus, Semliki Forest virus, Bunyamwera, Ntaya, Uganda S. and Zika. Semliki Forest 
virus did not develop in A. aegypti which was not thought to be significant in its transmission 
(Davies and Yoshpe-Purer, 1954 b). 
Forms of encephalitis affecting human beings and horses in Ecuador acquired in jungle 
areas are noted by Levi-Castillo (1952) as having been shown to be transmissible by several 
species of mosquito, A. aegypti not being among these. 
Virus diseases of animals. An important disease of animals shown to be transmitted by 
A. aegypti is equine encephalitis which exists in Africa in two forms, a western and an 
eastern form, the former being more readily transmitted. The virus is thought to be norm- 
ally maintained as an infection of birds (Kelser, 1933 ; Merrill and Ten Broek, 1940; and 
others). The virus has been shown to multiply a hundred times or more in the mosquito. 
A. aegypti has been shown to transmit haemorrhagic septicaemia of buffaloes (Nieschulz 
and Kraneveld, 1929). It also transmits the virus of fowl-pox. The virus at first is generally 
distributed throughout the body of the mosquito, but later collects on and about the 
proboscis (Rivers, 1929; Stuppy, 1931; Brody, 1936). 
An important disease of sheep and to a less extent of cattle in Africa is Rift Valley fever 
(enzootic hepatitis). It causes abortion in sheep and cattle and human cases are contracted 
by contact with diseased animals or their organs. The virus is present in wild mosquitoes 
including A. africanus (Smithburn and Gillett, 1948; Smithburn, Haddow and Lumsden, 
82 
RELATION TO DISEASE 
1949). A neurotropic strain from mice has been used as a vaccine for protection of sheep 
(see Smithburn, 1949). 
A. aegypti has been suspected of transmitting horse sickness (Balfour, 1912), but many 
attempts to transmit this disease experimentally by the species have given negative results 
(Nieschulz, Bedford and Du Toit, 1934; Du Toit, 1944). 
Filariasis. It has been shown by numerous observations that A. aegypti is not an efficient 
vector of Wucheria bancrofti. Though some development takes place it is very rarely that 
any embryo is found in the proboscis (Aders, 19 17 ; Francis, 19 19 ; Edwards, 1922 ; 
Connal, 1931; Hicks, 1932; Newton, Wright and Pratt, 1945; and others). 
Nor does A. aegypti transmit Filaria ozzardi, a single embryo only being found by 
N. C. Davis (1928) in his investigation of filarial diseases in the Argentine. 
A. aegypti is, however, an active vector of DiroJZaria immitis in the dog (Bernaud and 
Bauche, 1913 (D. repens); Feng, 1930; Hinman, 1935; de1 Rosario, 1936; Roubaud, 1937; 
Galliard, 1937, 1942; Summers, 1943 ; Kartman, 1953). Kershaw, Lavoipierre and 
Chalmers (1953), investigating the intake of embryos by A. aegypti, found a considerable 
reduction in survival rate of the mosquitoes following feeding an an infected, as against an 
uninfected, dog. Those mosquitoes that took in more than a certain number failed to live 
long enough to become infective. 
Other miscellaneous diseases. Philip, Davis and Parker (1932) obtained transmission of 
tularaemia by interrupted feed in one positive result with A. aegypti. Under certain 
conditions Roubaud and Lafont (1914) thought transmission of human trypanosomiasis 
might be possible. It was only transmitted, however, with very heavy infections and a 
yard’s distance sufficed to protect. A. aegypti has been suspected of transmitting leprosy 
(Blanchard, 1905 ; Not, 19 12 ; Gomes, 1923). Archibald (1923) found undulant fever could 
be conveyed to monkeys by the bite of A. aegypti. 
A. aegypti failed to transmit avian plague (Nieschulz, Bos and Tarip, 1931) or surra 
to rats by interrupted feeding (Kelser, 1927), or ephemeral fever in Australian cattle, a 
disease related to dengue (Mackerras, Mackerras and Burnet, 1940). A. aegypti has been 
shown to convey myxomatosis in wild rabbits (Aragao, 1943 ; Bull and Mules, 1944), 
though not apparently specifically. 
Blood parasites of birds and mammals. A. aegypti is the normal vector of Plasmodium 
gallivlaceum Brumpt of fowls (Brumpt, 1936; James and Tate, 1938); Lumsden and 
Bertram, 1940; Huff and Coulston, 1944; and others). It is also capable of acting as host 
to some other plasmodia of birds, being susceptible to P. cathemerium and P. inconstans, 
but negative to P. praecox (Huff, 1927). Et. Sergent (1942) also notes that compared with 
Culexpipiens it is a poor host to Plasmodium relictum. A very small percentage produced 
oocysts (but not sporozoites) with P. Zophurae (Coggleshall, 1941; Laird, 1941). Trager 
(1942), however, produced a strain by selective breeding that was susceptible to this 
parasite. 
Sepsis. Apart from transmission of disease in the usually accepted sense the bites of 
Ai;des aegypti may cause local reaction which may in certain circumstances be severe or 
be followed by septic infection. The effect of mosquito bites on the human subject is dealt 
with in a later chapter. 
83 6-2 
MEDICAL 
Not to be minimised also is the irritation of the bites of this species, especially to new- 
comers in the tropics, and the effect of the perpetual attacks in day-time which make 
A. aegypti when at all numerous one of the most troublesome pests in the tropics. 
(b) CONTROL AND PROTECTION 
A distinction may be made between methods which have the object of destroying or 
preventing the breeding of mosquitoes, which may be termed measures of control, and those 
concerned with protection against their bites, or measures of protection. Control measures 
are by their nature usually such as are carried out by public health or other organised 
bodies, though the individual may by his co-operation greatly assist. Protective measures 
more usually are the concern of the individual, though one such measure, namely screening, 
may in certain cases be carried out on a large scale as a public health measure. 
CONTROL 
Anti-A&Yes aegyp ti campaigns. Control measures of the nature of anti-A. aegypti cam- 
paigns have been extensively carried out, more especially in those parts of the New World 
where yellow fever was liable to occur in epidemic form. Some of these have been on a 
very large scale, aiming at eradication of the species from whole towns or even whole 
countries. 
Many accounts of such campaigns are to be found in the literature. One of the most 
detailed is that by Soper, Wilson, Lima and Antunes (1943) describing the operations and 
technique employed in the nation-wide anti-A. aegypti campaign undertaken in Brazil. 
Another very full account of control measures against A. aegypti is given by Herms and 
Gray (1940) in their chapter on mosquito control in urban areas. * 
All the above pre-date the discovery and use of DDT and other synthetic insecticides in 
residual spraying. The methods and technique used have been those now described as 
‘classical methods of control ’ and the question arises how far such methods are now to 
be considered outmoded. De Caires (1947), describing A. aegypti control in Georgetown, 
British Guiana, under the adverse condition, as he notes, of a lack of a piped water supply, 
observes that classical methods had been in use up to 1945, but A. aegypti was not eradi- 
cated and the numbers of the species continued to fluctuate with rainfall. At the beginning 
of 1946 residual spraying with 5 per cent DDT in kerosene giving 100 mg. DDT residual 
film per sq. ft. was substituted, and the A. aegypti index was reduced to zero by the end of 
the year. Giglioli (1948), speaking of measures taken in British Guiana, notes that malaria, 
filariasis and yellow fever have all been controlled by residual spraying with DDT and that 
Anopheles darlingi and A?des aegypti have been eradicated from 200 miles of coast land 
and estuary banks by the same methods. Nor are these unique as claims for the remarkable 
effectiveness of this new approach to the problem and there can be no doubt that in 
A. aegypti control as in malaria control the use of the new compounds, especially the 
* For accounts of earlier examples see Boyce (1906, prophylaxis in New Orleans in 1905), James (1914) and 
James, Da Silva and Arndt (1914, survey of the Port of Colombo), Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912, pp. 252-S and 
429-36), Carter (1922, epidemic of 1919-20 in Peru), Connor and Monroe (1923, Stegomyia indices), Connor (1924, 
suggestions for developing a campaign of control), Dunn (1923, Peru), Dunn and Hanson (1925, Colombia), 
Hanson (1925, Colombia), Rigollot (1927, Dakar), Soper (1938, South America), Sneath (1939, British Guiana). 
84 
CONTROL AND PROTECTION 
method of residual spraying, will both supplement and to a large degree modify or even 
render obsolete much of the previous technique as used against all mosquito-borne disease. 
Whilst, however, residual spraying is a very effective method, it does not necessarily rule 
out all other action. An effective piped water supply is still an important measure in 
control, the education of the inhabitants of a city regarding use of certain simple pre- 
cautions is still desirable, water tanks and certain other collections should by legislation 
be suitably protected and, above all, adequate inspection is essential. Certain circum- 
stances too may still make some of the classical methods applicable. Thus the type of house 
is not always the native hut or simple dwelling so often to be dealt with in malaria work, 
and heavy infestation with A. aegypti may be present in large cities in relatively better- 
class houses where the older methods still have a place. Whatever methods be used, 
success, as in other public health work, depends upon good administration, aided by all the 
many methods which make public health work effective, including trained personnel, 
legislation, propaganda and education of the public where this can be brought to bear. 
That such action may result in virtual disappearance of the species over large areas has 
been shown by the result of operations in Brazil (Soper et al. 1943) and Texas (Chandler, 
1956). See also Sever0 (1956a), who, as previously noted, gives a map showing the present 
greatly restricted distribution of A. aegypti in America. 
Control of breeding places. The nature of the breeding places of A. aegypti has already been 
indicated. Many of these can be disposed of by emptying or destroying receptacles. When 
water pots cannot be emptied, as the water is required for human consumption, some form 
of covering is a simple precaution. Cisterns and other water storage collections should be 
made impervious to mosquitoes. Where water is not required for drinking or cooking and 
cannot be otherwise dealt with, some form of larvicide is called for. A number of insec- 
ticidal substances, and even some natural enemies, have been suggested for such conditions, 
but for most purposes in or about the house the commonly sold preparations of cresol or 
kerosine are simple to use and effective. In better-class houses attention should be given 
especially to anti-formicas, a very common form of breeding place, and flower vases. 
Disused water-closets may be a potent source of breeding. In rural areas, especially in the 
rainy season, disused pots and various other receptacles holding rain-water can be destroyed 
or otherwise dealt with. Where water is precious Lewis (1955) refers to the use of benzene 
hexachloride and cement tablets as devised by Bruce-Chwatt (1953). Breeding places 
about docks, lighters, river craft, machinery dumps, waste ground, cemeteries, etc. are 
usually most simply treated with some form of crude petroleum. A very complete account 
of the properties of different oils used as larvicides is given by Moore and Graham (19 18) 
and by Murray (1936) ; see also the very full account given by Herms and Gray (1940) on 
oils and larvicides. However, as noted later, the newer forms of insecticide may be used. 
Breeding in ships is an important special case (Lutz and Machado, 1915 ; Tanner, 193 1; 
Chabrillat, 1934) and a very full account, with apparatus likely to be useful, is given by 
Blacklock and Wilson (1942). Breeding in country craft is dealt with by Bana (1936). 
For some purposes poisonous gases and vapours have been used. Macfie (19 16) found 
chlorine effective. Williamson (1924), testing gases and vapours against breeding in wells, 
found H,S and chloropicrin (1 in 200,000) effective against some species, but first-stage 
A. aegypti larvae were exceptions. Barber (1944) found carbon bisulphide, toluene, 
benzene and carbon tetrachloride the most rapidly fatal of vapours. 
85 
MEDICAL 
A measure much used, especially in the earlier campaigns against the species, has been 
the employment of larvivorous fish. Seal (1908) is stated by Molloy (1924) probably to 
be the first to recommend use of such fish on a large scale. The first suggestion to use fish 
in control of the breeding of mosquitoes was, however, made as early as 1892 by Russell. 
A digest of literature on the use of fish for mosquito control with a bibliography of 217 
titles is published by the International Health Board, Rockefeller Foundation, 1924. An 
account of Indian larvivorous fish is given by Prashad and Hora (1936). Species of Gam- 
busia, or ‘millions ‘, have been successfully used in wells, cisterns and tanks (Myers, 1926; 
Le Van, 1940), but other small fish have been preferred for particular purposes, for 
example the native fish ‘ chalaco’ (Dermitator Zatifrons) found hardier by Connor (1921) 
in Ecuador. Silver bait (Tetragonopterus, Charax and Hemigrammus) which can live in the 
absence of larvae were found of great value by Haslam (1925) in British Guiana. This author 
also found Haplosternum littoralis and Chicosoma bimaculatum useful for small collec- 
tions of water. Astranax bimaculatum was found effective for large, and Hemigrammus 
unilineatus for smaller collections of water by Ihering (1933). The poeciloid fish Rivulus 
common in American jungles is suggested by Myers. 
How far many of the above means of controlling breeding are still likely to be found of 
use is doubtful. Not only is it whether DDT or some other synthetic chlorinated compound 
is that to be used, but the whole question of the use of larvicides for the purpose of control 
has been brought into question, or at least modified, by the results obtained from residual 
spraying. DDT as a larvicide is used as a wettable powder, as an emulsion or dissolved in 
diesel oil or other solvent. Floch and Layudie (1946) found DDT powder highly toxic to 
larvae of Culex spp. and AL;des aegypti and more effective than the plant poisons previously 
in use. In a U.S. Army medical bulletin, 1945, entitled The Prevention of Dengue Fever, 
a powder containing 10 per cent DDT or a 5 per cent solution or emulsion is recom- 
mended for artificial containers not holding water for drinking or cooking. In the same 
bulletin tests with different waters showed that DDT killed 70-100 per cent of larvae in 
such low dilution as 0.03 per million. Lever (1946) found sawdust impregnated with DDT 
in diesel oil suspended in a disused swimming bath prevented breeding of Culex sitiens. 
O’Kane (1947) notes that a dust containing 0.5 per cent gamma isomer benzene hexa- 
chloride on the surface of water at 10 lb. per acre gave complete control of breeding of 
Agdes species including A. aegypti. 
Measures against the adult mosquito. Of measures against the adult mosquito one of the 
most important and usual is the use of sprays or aerosols. These have been greatly developed 
recently and there is a large literature dealing with the physical factors involved and the 
action of the droplets. The use of very finely divided droplet sprays (aerosols) has been 
specially developed. * 
An important point in respect to aerosols is that the dose taken up by the insect is 
largely proportional to the extent to which the wings are used in flight. To give rapid 
knock-down pyrethrum, usually in the form of the pyrethrins, holds a high position. 
Synthetic compounds of the same type as the pyrethrins are also effective (see under 
insecticides in ch. XXV). 
* See Sinton and Wats (1935), David (1946a, b), Bishopp (1946), Goodhue (1946), David and Bracey (1946), 
Muirhead Thomson (1947). A very full and technical description of the apparatus and parts used is given in the 
6th Report of the Expert Committee on Insecticides of the World Health Organisation, 1956. 
86 
CONTROL AND PROTECTION 
Fumigation is a method formerly much employed, though now largely replaced by 
spraying. A number of fumigants are given by Howard (19 17) ; see also Cove11 (1941). 
The use of traps against A. aegypti is also a measure that has not been much employed. 
For an account of mosquito traps see Herms and Gray (1940), p. 92. Other methods such 
as the use of natural enemies (see ch. III), attraction of the male by sound (see Kahn and 
Offenhauser, 1949), though they should be mentioned, are now but little used, or do not 
apply to control of A. aegypti. 
Almost all direct attack on the adult is now by sprays or aerosols containing DDT or 
one of its analogues combined with a suitable knock-down component (see section on 
insecticides in ch. xxv). Or residual spraying is employed. 
Residual spraying. Residual spraying consists in spraying or otherwise coating surfaces 
such as walls of habitations with fluid that will leave a layer of the non-volatile insecticide 
employed, the constitution of the sprayed material being commonly referred to as a 
‘formulation’. The compounds most usually employed are DDT or gamma BHC (gam- 
mexane) usually referred to as BHC. An analogue of DDT, namely dieldrin, has also 
been found very effective and has increasingly come into use. Another compound of the 
same type, chordane, much used against the housefly has also sometimes been used. For 
an account of the nature of these substances, usually described as synthetic chlorinated 
compounds, see Busvine (1952), who gives a brief, but adequate, account of compounds 
later than DDT and BHC. Other references dealing with these new insecticides, including 
several helpful books, are given in the section on insecticides referred to above. Regarding 
various points connected with the use of the compounds in residual spraying a good recent 
factual summary is given by Jaswant Singh and Rajindar Pal (1952). Much practical 
information on details in their employment is given by Davidson (1952). * The literature is 
so large dealing with various aspects of the use of the compounds that it is difficult to 
point out those most likely to be helpful. Many of those dealing with practical problems 
will be found in the Indian Journal of Malariology, 1952-4 ; recent numbers of the American 
Journal of Tropical Medicine; Bulletin of Entomological Research; Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene; and abstracted in the Review of Applied 
Entomology B. 
Certain problems in connection with spraying require brief mention here, since it would 
be a mistake not to take note that these exist. 
The dosage and time that a residual film may be expected to retain efficiency are important. 
After an appropriate dosage (say 200 mg. of DDT per sq. ft.) this may be effective up to 
six months. A dosage of 100 mg. per sq. ft is more usual with corresponding reduction in 
the duration. Turner (1946) gives some experimental data in regard to Anopheles on the 
West Coast and still smaller dosage. One per cent DDT used to give a calculated deposit 
of 38.5 mg. per sq. ft. gave a relative absence of mosquitoes (1 to 4 as against the control) 
for eighteen weeks. When the dosage was reduced to 11.9 mg. per sq. ft. the same degree 
of reduction lasted four weeks. For reasons given later it is undesirable to employ sublethal 
dosage and a larger dosage than that just given might have been better. In India a dosage 
of 50-100 mg. per sq. ft. and repeating the application twice or even three times in the 
malaria season is practised (Jaswant Singh and Rajindar Pal, 1952). 
* See also Parker and Green (1947), Muirhead Thomson (1947), Andrews and Simmons (1948) (bibliography of 
134 references), Bishopp (1951), Hadaway and Barlow (1952). 
87 
MEDICAL 
Another point of importance is the effect of repellency by the film, which may result in 
mosquitoes not remaining sufficiently long in contact to receive a lethal dose and even 
possibly becoming excited so that, after feeding or not, they leave the house without being 
killed (Kennedy, 1947; Muirhead Thomson, 1947). 
Related to the above is the question of choice of insecticide as between DDT and BHC 
or other analogue. Results by workers are not always identical, but the general view is that 
BHC has a stronger initial effect so that dosage on contact is almost certainly lethal. At 
the same time repellent effect is greater and being more volatile the period of efficiency of 
the film is less. Many observers for these reasons use both substances in combination 
(Jaswant Singh and Rajindar Pal). 
Another important point is the nature of the deposit as laid down by different formu- 
lations, since the effectiveness of the film depends to some extent on whether DDT is used 
as a wettable powder or in solution and upon the size and character of the crystals as laid 
down by different solvents and procedures (Hadaway and Barlow, 1952; Rajindar Pal, 
1954b). In particular loss of effectiveness may be very great if spraying is carried out on 
mud walls (Rajindar Pal, 1954a; Rajindar Pal and Sharma, 1952) or on a whitewashed 
surface (Hadaway and Barlow, 1947). 
Also residual spraying, if long continued, may lead to development of resistant strains 
of mosquito. This condition was first reported in mosquitoes from Italy by Missiroli 
(1947) and by Mosna (1947), a resistant strain of Culex pipiens being developed following 
five years of spraying with DDT. A good account of the history of the condition with 
bibliography is given by Rajindar Pal, Sharma and Krishnamurthy (1952), who also 
record a resistant strain of C. fatigans in an area that had been sprayed for six years. 
A considerable number of other instances have now been recorded both in Culicines and in 
species of Anopheles. A troublesome feature is that resistance acquired to one chlorinated 
insecticide may be displayed in some degree to other compounds of this nature. A very 
full and complete account of such resistance with details of recorded instances has recently 
been given by Busvine (1957). Resistance in Ai;des aegypti has recently been noted in 
Trinidad where some cases of yellow fever occurred in 1954 (H. P. S. Gillette, 1956 ; 
Busvine, 1957). See also Sever0 (1956b), who refers to acquired resistance of A. aegypti to 
DDT in the Dominican Republic. 
Some further information on the nature of insecticides, the way in which they act and 
some remarks on the nature of acquired resistance are given in chapter xxv when dealing 
with viability of the adult under different conditions. 
Disinfection of aircraft. A special importance attaches to measures against mosquitoes in 
aircraft. This applies in particular to A. aegypti as a possible vector of yellow fever and 
recently as a possible vector of dengue in the South Pacific where there is a danger of 
introducing this species into areas where it has as yet not been established. Here also the 
use of residual spraying is replacing other methods. 
Disinfestation (or disinsectisation, a term often used) has been commonly carried out by 
aerosol spraying with pyrethins, lethane and other insecticides put up in suitable formu- 
lations for use with sparklet or pressure aerosol equipment. A description of methods is 
given by Duguet (1949), and a discussion of disinfestation under tropical conditions is 
given by Bruce-Chwatt and Coi (1950). A recent account of methods of aircraft disin- 
fection is that by Laird (1951), who notes that this may be carried out by fumigation, by 
88 
CONTROL AND PROTECTION 
aerosol mists, or by residual insecticides. Fumigation; though very effective, is too time 
consuming for wide use. For spraying with aerosol mists the medium used must be both 
free from inflammable material and non-damaging to fabrics, paper, etc., and also to 
perspex windows in pressurised aircraft. He recommends aerosol spraying before flight 
and monthly treatment with residual DDT. Aeroplanes were treated with DDT in 1945 
by Madden, Linquist and Knipling. 
PROTECTIVE MEASURES 
Screening. Screening of houses and buildings is a method that has been widely employed 
as a protective measure. It requires to be carried out with due regard to a number of 
considerations. An effective mesh and non-corrosible, sufficiently strong material with 
complete closure of entry are essential, as well as attention to the amenities and comfort of 
life. A good account of specifications for wire gauze and precautions to be taken is given 
by Cove11 (1941), and by Herms and Gray (1940). Mesh should be counted along two sides 
of a square inch counting the corner square twice, but is often given as meshes to the 
linear inch. Thickness of wire must be taken into account in considering size of aperture 
and to provide suitable strength to the screen. A mesh of 14, or better 16, to the linear inch 
and 30 I.S.W.G. (Imperial Standard Wire Gauge), that is a thickness of 0.0124 in. 
(0.315 mm.), is generally considered suitable. Or a wire thickness of O-015 in., giving an 
aperture of O-056 in., is better. A non-corrosive metal is also very important ; see Blacklock 
(1937) ; Galli-Valerio (1925) ; MacArthur (1923) ; Brown (1934) ; Mooij (1940) ; Cove11 ; 
Herms and Gray. The screening of ships is dealt with by Melville-Davison (1912). 
Personal protection. At least as important as any other form of protection is the use by the 
individual of the mosquito net and other precautions against being bitten. Most of these 
precautions are matters of common sense, yet are curiously neglected. Especially important 
is the use of suitable protective clothing, especially protection of the ankles (double socks) 
and seat and knees (under garment) where the insect is prevalent. A small hand net con- 
venient to handle is useful to despatch a stray annoying insect (see also Legendre, 1913). 
Where all else fails some form of repellent preparation may be used. The preparations 
most likely to be useful against A. aegypti under ordinary circumstances are not so much 
the long-lasting non-volatile repellents such as dimethyl phthalate (DMP) used where 
mosquitoes are attacking voraciously on active service and the like, but certain more 
pleasant temporarily effective substances such as a good Java citronella oil, or citronellol, 
the active principle. A good citronella oil is very useful for protection by day in the house 
or office, as it need not be spread over all exposed skin surfaces as with DMP preparations, 
but can be applied here and there on clothing, etc. Where mosquitoes are numerous, and 
more effective methods of protection are necessary, DMP should be used. This is most 
effective neat, covering all exposed skin surfaces after anointing the palms, but may be used 
for tender skins or greater comfort as a cream. DMP does not readily form a good stable 
cream, but one recommended as stable and pleasant is that given by the present author 
in a report on mosquito repellents (Christophers, 1947) which is as follows: 
Dimethyl phthalate 12.5 C.C. 
White wax (Cera alba B.P.) 9 gm. 
Arachis oil 27.5 C.C. 
Melt the wax on a water bath with the arachis oil and stir in the DMP while hot. Filter hot 
through wool if necessary and put up in suitable wide mouth bottle as a solid cream. 
MEDICAL 
The preparation can be modified for different climates by slightly increasing or decreasing 
the proportion of white wax. It has no waxy feel when applied, which its composition 
might suggest. It is permanent and spreads thinly and readily. 
The use of zinc oxide, included as an adsorbent of the DMP, as employed in some 
preparations on the market, is not recommended as such are cosmetically unpleasant. So 
far no substance taken internally has been found effective. Thiamin chloride was stated to 
be so by W. R. Shannon (1943), but was not found so by Wilson, Matheson and Jackowski 
(1944). For an account of research on repellents see Travis, Morton and Cochran (1946). 
A measure of very doubtful efficacy is the use of certain plants that have been popularly 
supposed to have a repellent effect on mosquitoes, for example Ocimum viride, a plant 
with a strong smell of lemon thyme if rubbed or chewed (Holmes, 1878, 1879); the castor 
oil plant, claims for which seem to be without any real foundation (see Insect Lijk, 5, 359, 
1893). Various forms of mosquito trap are described, but they are probably more suitable 
for Culex than AZdes aegypti, though special types might perhaps be designed. 
Whilst all the above are available to the individual for his self-protection, the prime 
procedure under normal conditions in the tropics, when protection is called for against 
A. aegypti as a troublesome day-biting mosquito in a bungalow or quarters, is to make 
a thorough search for any breeding places of the pest there may be about the premises 
and take appropriate action against these. Often days or weeks of annoyance may be done 
away with by such a search whenever presence of the insect begins to be noticeable. If the 
source of supply is from outside and irremovable, then screening of the house or quarters 
is indicated. 
REFERENCES 
(a) RELATION TO DISEASE 
Yellow fever 
ARAGAO, H. DE B. (1939). Mosquitoes and yellow fever virus. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 34, 
565-81. 
ARAGAO, H. DE B. and COSTA-LIMA, A. (1929). Sur la transmission du virus de la fikvre jaune par 
les dijections de moustiques infect&. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 102, 534, 477-8. 
BAILEY, K. P. (1947). Preliminary note on the sylvan mosquitoes of Gede. E. Afr. Med. J. 24, 
38-41. 
BATES, M. (1949). The Natural History of Mosquitoes. Macmillan and Co., New York. 
BAUER, J. (1928). The transmission of yellow fever by mosquitoes other than AL;des aegypti. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 8, 261-82. 
BEEUWKES, H., BAUER, J. H. and MAHAFFY, A. F. (1930). Yellow fever endemicity in West 
Africa with special reference to protection tests. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 10, 305-33. 
BEEUWKES, H. and HAYNE, T. B. (1931). An experimental demonstration of the infectivity with 
yellow fever virus of Ai;des aegypti captured in an African town. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. 
Hyg. 25, 107-10. 
BOYCE, R. (1909). Mosquito or Man. John Murray, London. 
BOYCE, R. (1910). The distribution and prevalence of yellow fever in West Africa. J. Trop. Med. 
(Hyg.), 13, 357-62. 
BRUMPT, E. (1936). P&is de parasitologie. Ed. 5. Masson et Cie, Paris. 
CANNON, D. A. and DEWHURST, F. (1955). The preparation of 17D virus yellow fever vaccine in 
mouse brain. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 174-82. 
CARTER, H. R. (1922). Yellow fever in Peru. Epidemic of 1919 and 1920. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 2, 
87-106. 
90 
REFERENCES 
CCNNOR, M. E. (1923). Notes on yellow fever in Mexico. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 3, 105-16. 
DAVIS, N. C. (1933). Transmission of yellow fever virus by Culex fatigans Wied. Ann. Ent. Sot. 
Amer. 26, 491-5. 
DAVIS, N. C. and SHANNON, R. C. (1930). The location of yellow fever virus in infected mosquitoes 
and the possibility of hereditary transmission. Amer. J. Hyg. 11, 335-44. 
DINGER, J. E., SCHUFFNER, W. A. P., SNYDERS, E. P. and SWELLENGREBEL, N. H. (1929). Onderzoek 
over gele koorts in Nederland (derde mededeling). Ned. Tijdschr. Geneesk. 73 (quoted by 
Strode, 195 1). 
FINDLAY, G. M. (1952). Reviewer’s abstract to Strode (1951). Trop. Dis. Bull. 49, 337-9. 
FINDLAY, G. M. and COCKBURN, T. A. (1943). The possible role of birds in maintenance of yellow 
fever in West Africa. Nature, Lond., 152, 245. 
FINDLAY, G. M. and DAVEY, T. H. (1936). Yellow fever in the Gambia. I. Historical. Trans. R. 
Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 29, 667-78. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1951). The habits of the mosquito Aedes (Stegomyia) simpsoni Theobald in 
relation to the epidemiology of yellow fever in Uganda. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 45, 110-21. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955). Further studies on the biting behaviour of Ak;des (Stegomyia) simpsoni 
Theobald in Uganda. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 154-7. 
GILLETT, J. D. and Ross, R. W. (1955). The laboratory transmission of yellow fever by Malayan 
Aedes aegypti. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 63-5. 
GILLETT, J. D., Ross, R. W., DICK, G. W. A., HADDOW, A. J. and HEWITT, L. E. (1950). Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 44, 342-50. 
HADDOW, A. J., DICK, G. W. A., LUMSDEN, W. H. R. and SMITHBURN, K. C. (1951). Mosquitoes 
in relation to the epidemiology of yellow fever in Uganda. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 45, 
189-224. 
HINDLE, E. (1929). An experimental study of yellow fever. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 22, 
405-30. 
HINDLE, E. (1930). The transmission of yellow fever. Lancet, 2, 835. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (19 12). See chapter I (b), p. 4. 
KIRK, R. (1943). Some observations on the study and control of yellow fever in Africa with 
particular reference to the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 37, 
125-50. 
KIRK, R. and HASEEB, M. A. (1953). Animals and yellow fever infection in the Anglo-Egyptian 
Sudan. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 47, 225-31. 
LEWIS, D. J., HUGHES, T. P. and MAHAFFY, A. F. (1942). Experimental transmission of yellow 
fever by three common species of mosquitoes from the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 36, 34-8. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1955). Entomological studies relating to yellow fever epidemiology at Gede 
and Taveta, Kenya. Bull. Ent. Res. 46, 149-83. 
MACNAMARA, F. N. (1954). Isolation of the virus as a diagnostic procedure for yellow fever in 
West Africa. Bull. World HZth Org. 11, 391-401. 
MAHAFFY, A. F. (1949). The epidemiology of yellow fever in Central Africa. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. 
Med. Hyg. 42, 51 l-24. 
MAHAFFY, A. F., SMITHBURN, K. C., JACOBS, H. R. and GILLETT, J. D. (1942). Yellow fever in 
Western Uganda. Trans. R. Sot. Med. Trop. Hyg. 36, 9-20. 
MANSON-BAHR, P. H. (1954). Munson’s Tropical Diseases. Ed. 14. Cassell and Co., London. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1949). Studies on West African forest mosquitoes. Part 1. The seasonal 
distribution and biting cycle and vertical distribution of four of the principal species. Bull. 
Ent. Res. 40, 149-68. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1956). The Stegomyia mosquitoes of South Africa and some neighbouring terri- 
tories. Mem. Ent. Sot. Sthn. Afr. no. 4. 
PHILIP, C. B. (1929). Possibility of hereditary transmission of yellow fever virus by AFdes aegypti 
(Linn.). J. Exp. Med. 50, 703-8. 
PHILIP, C. B. (1930). Possibility of mechanical transmission by insects in experimental yellow 
fever. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 24, 493-501. 
9* 
MEDICAL 
RIVERS, T. M. (1952). Viral and Rickettsial Infections of Man. Ed. 2. J. B. Lippincott Co., 
Philadelphia. 
Ross, R. W. and GILLETT, J. D. (1950). The cyclical transmission of yellow fever virus through the 
Grivet monkey Cercopithecus aethiops centralis Neumann and the mosquito Ai;des (Stego- 
myia) africanus Theobald. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 44, 351-6. 
SAWER, W. A. (1942). The yellow fever situation in the Americas. Bol. OJic. Sanit. Pan-amer. 
no. 173, pp. 1-15. 
SMITH, H. H. and THEILER, M. (1937). The adaptation of unmodified strains of yellow fever virus 
to cultivation in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 65, 801-8. 
SMITHBURN, K. C. and HADDOW, A. J. (1946). Isolation of yellow fever virus from African 
mosquitoes. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 26, 261-71. 
SMITHBURN, K. C. and HADDOW, A. J. (1949). The susceptibility of African wild animals to yellow 
fever. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 29, 389-405. 
SMITHBURN, K. C., HADDOW, A. J. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1949). Outbreak of sylvan yellow 
fever in Uganda with Ai;des (Stegomyia) africanus Theobald as principal vector and insect 
host of virus. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 43, 74-89. 
SOPER, F. L. (1938). Yellow fever: the present situation (October 1938) with special reference to 
South America. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 32, 297-332. 
SOPER, F. L., PENNA, H., CARDOSO, E., SERAFIM, JR. J., FROBISHER, JR. M. and PINHEIRO, J. 
(1933). Yellow fever without AL;des aegypti. Amer. J. Hyg. 18, 555-87. 
STOKES, A., BAUER, J. H. and HUDSON, N. P. (1928). Experimental transmission of yellow fever to 
Macacus rhesus. Preliminary note. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 90, 253. 
STRODE, G. K. (1951). Yellow Fever. McGraw-Hill Publ. Co., London. 
TAYLOR, R. M. (1951). Epidemiology. In STRODE (1951). 
THEILER, M. and SMITH, H. H. (1937). The use of yellow fever virus modified by in vitro culti- 
vation for human immunisation. J. Exp. Med. 65, 789-800. 
WADDELL, M. B. (1945). Persistence of yellow fever virus in mosquitoes after death of the insect. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 25, 329-32. 
WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION (1952). Chron. World Hlth Org. 6 (1 I), p. 338. 
Dengue 
ADRIEN, C. (1918). Dengue MCditerrankenne observke B l’ile Rouad (Syrie). Arch. M&d. Pharm. 
Nav., Paris, 105, 275-307. 
ARMSTRONG, C. (1923). Dengue fever. Publ. Hlth Rep., Wash., 38, 1750-84. 
ASHBURN, P. M. and CRAIG, C. F. (1907). Experimental investigation regarding the aetiology of 
dengue fever. Philipp. J. Sci. Sect. B, 2, 93-147. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1928). The distribution of Stegomyia fasciata in India with remarks on dengue 
and yellow fever. Ind. J. Med. Res. 16, 377-88. 
BISHOPP, F. C. (1923). Dengue fever and mosquitoes in the south. J. Econ. Ent. 16, 97. 
BLANC, G. and CAMINOPETROS, J. (1930). Recherches exp&imentales sur la dengue. Ann. Inst. 
Pasteur, 44, 367-436. 
CARDAMATIS, J. P. (1929). La dengue en G&e. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 22, 272-92. 
CHANDLER, A. C. (1925). The transmission and etiology of dengue. A critical review. Indian Med. 
Gaz. 60, 460-2. 
CHANDLER, A. C. and RICE, L. (1923). Observations on the etiology of dengue fever. Amer. J. 
Trop. Med. 3, 233-62. 
CLELAND, J. B. (1928). Dengue fever in Australia. Rev. Prat. Mal. Pays Chauds, 8, 509-14. 
CLELAND, J. B., BRADLEY, B. and MACDONALD, M. (1918). Dengue fever in Australia. Its 
history and clinical course: its experimental transmission by Stegomyia fasciata and the 
results of inoculation and other experiments. J. Hyg., Camb., 16, 317-418. 
EKBLOM, T. (1929). Some observations on Stegomyia fasciata during a visit to Greece in the 
autumn of 1928. 1929 Acta Med. Stand. 70, 505-18. 
FARNER, D. S. and BOHART, R. M. (1948). A preliminary revision of the scutellaris group of the 
genus AEdes. U.S. Nav. Med. Bull. 44, 37-53. 
92 
REFERENCES 
FINDLAY, G. M. (1951). In Bank’s Modern Practice in Infectious Fevers. Vol. II. Butterworth 
and Co., London. 
GRAHAM, H. (1902). Dengwe: a study of its mode of propagation and pathology. Med. Rec., 
NY., 61, 204-7. 
HOLT, R. L. and KINTNER, J. H. (1931). Location of dengue virus in the body of mosquitoes. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 1, 103-l 1. 
JENKINS, C. F. H. (1945). Entomological problems of the Ord River Irrigation Area. J. Dep. 
Agric. W. Aust. (2), 22, 131-45. 
LEGENDRE, J. (1918). Note sur les Stegomyias de Tamatave. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 81, 832-3. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1955). The Aedes mosquitoes of the Sudan. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 
164-73. 
LUMLEY, G. F. (1943). Dengue. Part I. Medical. Serv. Publ., Dep. Hlth Australia (Sch. Publ. 
Hlth and Trop. Med.), no. 3, pp. 1-141. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1955). An epidemic of virus disease in Southern Province, Tanganyika 
Territory in 1952-3. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 49, 28-32. 
MCCARTHY, D. D. and WILSON, D. B. (1948). Dengue in the East African Command: incidence 
in relation to Aedes prevalence and some clinical features. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 42, 
83-8. 
MACKERRAS, I. M. (1946). Transmission of dengue fever by Acdes (Stegomyia) scutellaris Walk. 
in New Guinea. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 40, 295-312. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1956). See under (a) ‘Yellow fever ‘. 
OMAN, P. W. and CHRISTIENSEN, L. D. (1947). Malaria and other insect-borne diseases in the 
South Pacific campaign 194245. Entomology. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 27, 91-117. 
PERRY, W. J. (1948). The dengue vector in New Caledonia, the New Hebrides and the Solomon 
Islands. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 28, 253-9. 
PERRY, W. J. (1950). The mosquitoes and mosquito-borne diseases in New Caledonia, an historical 
account 1888-1946. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 30, 103-14. 
SCHULE, P. A. (1928). Dengue fever: transmission by Aedes aegypti. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 8, 
203-13. 
SILER, J. F., HALL, M. W. and HICHENS, A. D. (1926). Dengue: its history, epidemiology, 
mechanism of transmission, etiology, clinical manifestations, immunity and prevention. 
Phi&p. J. Sci. 29, l-304. 
SIMMONS, J. S. (1931). Dengue fever. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 11, 77-101. 
SIMMONS, J. S., ST JOHN, J. H., HOLT, R. L. and REYNOLDS, F. H. K. (1931). Possible transfer of 
dengue virus from infected to normal mosquitoes during copulation. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 11, 
199-216. 
SIMMONS, J. S., ST JOHN, J. H. and REYNOLDS, F. H. K. (1930). Dengue fever transmitted by AL;des 
albopictus Skuse. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 10, 17-21. 
ST JOHN, J. H., SIMMONS, J. S. and REYNOLDS, F. H. K. (1930). Transmission of dengue virus from 
infected to normal Ak;des aegypti. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 10, 23-4. 
SPADARO, 0. (1952). Osservazioni e considerazioni sulle principali malattie infettive dell Erytrea. 
Arch. Ital. Sci. Med. Trop. Parasit. 33, 666. 
Other diseases of man and animals 
ADERS, W. M. (1917). Economic biology. Zanzibar Protect., Ann. Rep. Publ. Hlth Dep. for 
1916. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 6, 123. 
ARAGAO, H. DE B. (1943). 0 virus do mixoma no coelho de mato (Sybvilagus minensis) sua trans- 
missao pelos Ak;des scapularis e aegypti. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 38, 93-9. 
ARCHIBALD, R. G. (1923). An unusual and fatal case of undulant fever contracted in Khartoum. 
J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 26, 55-7. 
BALFOUR, A. (1912). Current notes. Bull. Ent. Res. 2, 179. 
BERNARD, P. N. and BAUCHE, J. (1913). Stegomyia fasciata h&e intermediaire de Dirofilaria 
repens. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 6, 89-99. 
93 
MEDICAL 
BLANCHARD, R. (1905). Les moustiques; histoire naturelle et medicale. Rudeval, Paris. 
BRODY, A. L. (1936). The transmission of fowl-pox. Mem. Cornell Agric. Exp. Sta. no. 195. 
Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 25, 154. 
BRUMPT, E. (1936). RCceptivitiC de divers oiseaux domestiques et sauvages au parasite (Plasmo- 
dium gallinaceum) du paludisme de la poule domestique etc. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 203, 
750-2. 
BULL, L. B. and MULES, M. W. (1944). An investigation of myxomatosis cuniculi etc. J. Coun. 
Sci. Industr. Rex Aust. 17, 79-93. 
COGGLESHALL, L. T. (1939). The transmission of lymphocytic choriomeningitis by mosquitoes. 
Science, 89, 5 15-l 6. 
COGGLESHALL, L. T. (1941). Infection of Anopheles quadrimaculatus with Plasmodium cynomolgi, 
a monkey malaria parasite, and with P. Zophurae, an avian malaria parasite. Amer. J. Trop. 
Med. 21, 525-30. 
CONNAL, A. (1931). Ann. Med. San. Rep. Nigeria for 1930, pp. 71-97. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 
20, 66. 
DAVIES, A. M. and YOSHPE-PURER, Y. (1953). AL;des aegypti as a vector of West Nile virus. Bull. 
Res. Coun. Israel, 3, 127-8. 
DAVIES, A. M. and YOSHPE-PURER, Y. (1954a). Observations on the biology of West Nile virus 
with special reference to its behaviour in the mosquito Aedes aegypti. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 48, 46-54. 
DAVIES, A. M. and YOSHPE-PURER, Y. (19543). The transmission of Semliki Forest virus by 
Aedes aegypti. J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 57, 273-5. 
DAVIS, N. C. (1928). A study of the transmission of Filaria in northern Argentine. Amer. J. Hyg. 
8, 457-66. 
DEL ROS~IO, F. (1936). DiroJiZaria immitis Leidy and its culicine intermediate hosts in Manila. 
Phi&p. J. Sci. 60, 45-57. 
DICK, G. W. A. (1953). Epidemiological notes on some viruses isolated in Uganda. Trans. R. Sot. 
Trop. Med. Hyg. 47, 13-43. 
Du TOTT, R. M. (1944). The transmission of blue tongue and horse sickness by Culicoides. 
Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. 19, 7-16. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1922). The carriers of Filaria bancrofti. J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 25, 168-70. 
FENG, LAN-CHOU (1930). Experiments with DiroJiZaria immitis and local species of mosquitoes in 
Peiping, North China etc. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 24, 347-62. 
FRANCIS, E. (1919). Filariasis in Southern United States. U.S. Publ. Hlth Serv., Hyg. Lab. Bull. 
117, 36 pp. 
GALLIARD, H. (1937). L’evolution de DiroJilaria immitis Leidy chez Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti et 
A. albopictus au Tonkin. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 125, 130-2. 
GALLIARD, H. (1942). Recherches sur le mecanisme de la transmission filaires par les Culicides. 
Ann. Parasit. Hum. Comp. 18, 209-14. 
GOLDWASSER, R. A. and DAVIES, A. M. (1953). Transmission of a West Nile-like virus by AL;des 
aegypti. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 47, 326-7. 
GOMES, E. (1923). Sobre a transmissao da lepra pelos mosquitos. Brazil-med. 37, 379-91. 
HICKS, E. P. (1932). The transmission of Wucheria bancrofti in Sierra Leone. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 26, 407-22. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1935). Studies on the dog heart-worm, Dirofilaria immitis, etc. Amer. J. Trop. 
Med. 15, 371-83. 
HUFF, C. G. (1927). Studies on the infectivity of Plasmodia of birds for mosquitoes, etc. Amer. J. 
Hyg. 7, 707-34. 
HUFF, C. G. and COULSTON, F. (1944). The development of Plasmodium gallinaceum from sporo- 
zoites to erythrocytic trophozoites. J. Infect. Dis. 75, 231-49. 
JAMES, S. P. and Tate, P. (1938). Exoerythrocytic schizogony in Plasmodium gallinaceum Brumpt 
1935. Parasitology, 30, 128-39. 
KARTMAN, L. (1953). Factors influencing infection of the mosquito with Dirofilaria immitis 
(Leidy). Exp. Parasit. 2, 27-78. 
94 
REFERENCES 
KELSER, R. A. (1927). Transmission of surra among animals of the equine species. Phi&p. J. Sci. 
34, 115-41. 
KELSER, R. A. (1933). Mosquitoes as vectors of the virus of equine encephalomyelitis. J. Amer. 
Vet. Med. Ass. 82 (new ser. 35), 767-71. 
KERSHAW, W. E., LAVOIPIERRE, M. M. J. and CHALMERS, T. A. (1953). Studies on the intake of 
microfilariae by their insect vectors, etc. I. Diro$laria immitis and Aedes aegypti. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 4’7, 207-24. 
LAIRD, R. L. (1941). Observations on mosquito transmission of Plasmodium Zophurae. Amer. J. 
Hyg. 34, 163-7. 
LEVI-CASTILLO, R. (1952). The problem of human and equine encephalomyelitis. Acta Tropica, 
9, 77-80. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. and BERTRAM, D. S. (1940). Observations on the biology of Plasmodium 
gallinaceum Brumpt 1935 in the domestic fowl with special reference to the production of 
gametocytes and the development in Aedes aegypti. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 34, 
135-60. 
MACKERRAS, I. M., MACKERRAS, M. J. and BURNET, F. M. (1940). Experimental studies of 
ephemeral fever in Australian cattle. Bull. Court. Sci. Industr. Res. Aust. no. 136, 116 pp. 
MARKS, E. N. (1954). Research on Australian mosquitoes. Presidential Address. Ent. Sot. 
Queensland. 
MERRILL, M. H. and TEN BROECK, C. (1940). The transmission of equine encephalomyelitis virus 
by Aedes aegypti. J. Exp. Med. 62, 687-95. 
MILZER, A. (1942). Studies on the transmission of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus by 
Arthropods. J. Infect. Dis. 70, 152-72. 
MUSPRATT, J. (1956). See under (a) Yellow fever. 
NEWTON, W. L., WRIGHT, W. H. and PRATT, I. (1945). Experiments to determine potential vectors 
of Wucheria bancrofti in the continental United States. Amer. J. Trap. Med. 25, 
253-61. 
NIESCHULZ, 0. and KRANEVELD, F. C. (1929). Experimentelle Untersuchungen iiber die Uber- 
tragung der Biiffelseuche durch Insekten. Zbl. Bakt. (Orig.), 113, 403-17. 
NIESCHULZ, O., BEDFORD, G. A. H. and Du TOIT, R. M. (1934). Investigation of the transmission 
of horse sickness at Onderstepoort during the season 1931-2. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. 3, 
275-334. 
NIESCHULZ, O., Bos, A. and TARIP, R. M. (1931). Uebertragungsversuche mit Gefliigelpest und 
Stegomyia aegypti. Zbl. Bakt. (Orig.), 121, 413-20. 
Not, F. (1912). Remarques et observations sur le role des moustiques dans la propagation de la 
lepre. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 5, 787-89. 
PHILIP, C. B., DAVIS, G. E. and PARKER, R. R. (1932). Experimental transmission of tularaemia. . 
Publ. Hlth Rep., Wash., 4’7, 2077-88. 
RIVERS, T. M. (1929). Filterable Viruses. Williams and Wilkins Co., Baltimore. 
ROUBAUD, E. (1937). Nouvelle recherches sur l’infection du moustique de la fievre jaune, Diro- 
filaria immitis Leidy. Les races biologiques d’Ac?des aegypti et l’infection filarienne. Bull. 
Sot. Path. Exot. 30, 511-19. 
ROUBAUD, E. and LAFONT, A. (1914). Experience de transmission de trypanosomes humains 
d’Afrique par les moustiques des habitations (Stegomyia fasciata). Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 7, 
49-52. 
SANMARTIN-BARBERI, G., GROOT, H. and OSARNO-MESA, E. (1955). Human epidemics in Colom- 
bia caused by the Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis. Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 3, 
283-93. 
SERGENT, ET. (1942). Paludisme des oiseaux. Receptivite des moustiques a l’infection du 
Plasmodium relictum. Arch. Inst. Pasteur Alger. 18, 214-15. 
SMITHBURN, K. C. (1949). Rift Valley fever: neurotropic adaptation of the virus and experi- 
mental use of this modified virus as a vaccine. Brit. J. Exp. Path. 30, 1-16. 
SMITHBURN, K. C. and GILLETT, J. D. (1948). Rift Valley fever: isolation of the virus from wild 
mosquitoes. Brit. J. Exp. Path. 29, 107-21. 
95 
MEDICAL 
SMITHBURN, K. C., HADDOW, E. J. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1949). Rift Valley fever; trans- 
mission of the virus by mosquitoes. &it. J. Exp. Path. 30, 35-47. 
STUPPY, C. (1931). Uebertragung von Htihnerpocken durch Mticken. Zbl. Bakt. (Orig.), 123, 
172-8. 
SUMMERS, W. A. (1943). Experimental studies on larval development of DiroJiZaria immitis in 
certain insects. Amer. J. Hyg. 37, 173-8. 
TAYLOR, R. M. and HURLBUTT, H. S. (1953). Isolation of West Nile virus from Culex mosquitoes. 
J. R. Egypt. Med. Ass. 36, 199-208. 
TRACER, W. (1942). A strain of the mosquito Ai;des aegypti selected for susceptibility to the avian 
parasite Plasmodium lophurae. J. Parasit. 28, 457-65. 
WORK, T. H., HURLBUTT, H. S. and TAYLOR, R. M. (1955). Indigenous wild birds of the Nile 
Delta as potential West Nile virus circulating reservoirs. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 4, 872-8. 
(b) CONTROL AND PROTECTION 
ANDREWS, J. M. and SIMMONS, S. W. (1948). Developments in the use of the newer organic 
insecticides of public health importance. Amer. J. Publ. Hlth, 38, 613-3 1. 
ARMY MEDICAL DEPT. U.S.A. (1945). The prevention of dengue fever. Bull. U.S. Army Med. Dep. 
4, 535-9. 
BANA, F. D. (1936). A practical way of dealing with AL;des aegypti (Stegomyia fasciata) mosquito 
breeding in country craft. Indian Med. Gaz. 71, 79-80. 
BARBER, M. A. (1944). A measurement of the toxicity to mosquito larvae of the vapours of 
certain larvicides. Publ. Hlth Rep., Wash., 59, 1275-8. 
BISHOPP, F. C. (1946). The insecticidal situation. J. Econ. Ent. 39, 449-59. 
BISHOPP, F. C. (1951). Insecticides and methods of control. Rep. 9th Internat. Congr. Entomo- 
logy. WHO/Ma1./73. 
BLACKLOCK, D. B. (1937). Screencloth for houses in the tropics. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 31, 
447. 
BLACKLOCK, D. B. and WILSON, C. (1942). Apparatus for the collection of mosquitoes in ships 
with notes on methods of salivary gland dissection. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 36, 53-62. 
BOYCE, R. (1906). Yellow fever prophylaxis in New Orleans in 1905. Lpool Sch. Trop. Med. 
Mem. 19. 
BRO‘WN, J. Y. (1934). Safe mosquito nets for use in the tropics. W. Afr. Med. J. 7, 147-8. 
BRUCE-CHWATT, L. J. (1953). Colonial Med. Res. Comm. 1953. Eighth Ann. Rep. 1952-3, p. 126. 
BRUCE-CHWATT, L. J. and COI, K. H. (1950). Report on trials on aircraft disinsectization in West 
Africa. WHO Expert Comm. on Insecticidesl6, dated 30 May 1950. 
BUSVINE, J. R. (1952). The newer insecticides in relation to pests of medical importance. Trans. 
R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 46, 245-52. 
BUSVINE, J. R. (1957). Insecticide resistance. Strains of insects of public health importance. 
Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 51, 11-31. 
CARTER, H. R. (1922). Yellow fever in Peru. Epidemic of 1919 and 1920. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 2, 
87-106. 
CHABRILLAT, M. (1934). Note sur la fievre de trois jours. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 27, 761-6. 
CHANDLER, A. C. (1956). History of Aedes aegypti control work in Texas. Mosquito News, 16, 
58-63. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1921). Fish as mosquito destroyers. An account of the part they played in 
control of yellow fever at Guayaquil, Ecuador. Nat. Hist. 21, 279-81. New York. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1924). Suggestions for developing a campaign to control yellow fever. Amer. J. 
Trop. Med. 4, 277-307. 
CONNOR, M. E. and MONROE, W. M. (1923). Stegomyia indices and their value in yellow fever 
control. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 3, 9-19. 
COVELL, G. (1941). Malaria Control by Antimosquito Measures. Thacker and Co., London. 
DAVID, W. A. L. (1946a). Factors influencing the interaction of insecticidal mists and flying 
insects. Part I. Bull. Ent. Res. 36, 373-93. 
96 
REFERENCES 
DAVID, W. A. L. (19463). Factors influencing the interaction of insecticidal mists and flying 
insects. Part II. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, l-28. 
DAVID, W. A. L. and BRACEY, P. (1946). Factors influencing the interaction of insecticidal mists 
and flying insects. Part III. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, 177-90. 
DAVIDSON, G. (1952). Experiments on the use of DDT, BHC and dieldrin against adult mos- 
quitoes at Taveta. Nature, Lond., 170, 702. 
DE CAIRES, P. F. (1947). Ai;des aegypti control in absence of a piped water supply. Amer. J. 
Trop. Med. 27, 733-43. 
DUGUET, J. (1949). Disinsectization of aircraft. Bull. World Hlth Org. 2, 155-91. 
DUNN, L. H. (1923). Prevalence of yellow fever mosquito At?des calopus in the southern parts of 
Peru. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 3, l-8. 
DUNN, L. H. and HANSON, H. (1925). Prevalence of the yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti in 
Colombia. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 5, 401-l 8. 
FLOCH, H. and DE LAYUDI, P. (1946). l%udes des propriktds insecticides de plantes guyanaises. 
Publ. Inst. Pasteur Guyane, no. 127, 7 pp. Cayenne. 
GALLI-VALERIO, B. (1925). Beobachtungen iiber Culiciden etc. Zbl. Bakt. (Orig.), 94, 309-13. 
GIGLIOLI, G. (1948). Malaria, filariasis and yellow fever in British Guiana. Control by residual 
DDT method, etc. Georgetown. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 37, 40. 
GILLETTE, H. P. S. (1956). Yellow fever in Trinidad: a brief review. Mosquito News, 16, 121-5. 
GOODHUE, L. D. (1946). Aerosols and their application. J. Econ. Ent. 39, 506-9. 
HADAWAY, A. B. and BARLOW, F. (1952). Some physical factors affecting the efficiency of 
insecticides. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 46, 236-44. 
HANSON, H. (1925). General report on the yellow fever campaign in Colombia. Amer. J. Trop. 
Med. 5, 393-400. 
HASLAM, J. F. C. (1925). Observations on the experimental use of fish indigenous to British 
Guiana for control of mosquitoes breeding in vats, tanks, barrels and other water con- 
tainers. J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 28, 284-8. 
HERMS, W. B. and GRAY, H. F. (1940). Mosquito Control. The Commonwealth Fund, New York, 
and Oxford Univ. Press, London. 
HOLMES, E. M. (1878, 1879). Notes on the medicinal plants of Nigeria. Pharm. J. 8, 563-4; 
9, 853. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (19 17). Remedies and preventions against mosquitoes. U.S. Dep. Agric. Farmer’s 
Bull. no. 444, pp. 1-15. 
HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB. See chapter I (b). 
IHERING, R. VON (1933). OS heixes larbophagos utilizado no combate a febre amarilla et a malaria. 
Rev. Med.-cirurg. Bras& 41, 221-34. 
INTERNATIONAL HEALTH BOARD. ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION (1924). The Use of Fish for 
Mosquito Control. Bibliography of 217 titles. 
JAMES, S. P. (1914). Summary of a year’s mosquito work in Colombo. Ind. J. Med. Res. 2, 
227-67. 
JAMES, S. P., DA SILVA, W. T. and ARNDT, E. W. (1914). Report on a mosquito survey of Colombo 
and the practicability of reducing Stegomyia and some other mosquitoes in that seaport. 
Govt. Record Off. Colombo. 
JASWANT SINGH and RAJINDAR PAL (1952). Organic synthetic insecticides employed in malaria 
control. Ind. J. Malar. 6, 219-23. 
KAHN, M. C. and OFFENHAUSER, W. (1949). The first field tests of recorded mosquito sounds used 
for mosquito destruction. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 29, 81 l-25. 
KENNEDY, J. S. (1947). The excitant and repellent effect on mosquitoes of sublethal contact with 
DDT. BuZl‘Ent. ‘Res. 37, 593-607. - 
LAIRD, M. (1951). Insects collected from aircraft arriving in New Zealand 
Publ. Vict. Univ. CoZZ. no. 11, pp. l-30. 
LE VAN, J. H. (1940). Measures instituted for the control of Aedes aegypti. 
30, 595-9. 
LEGENDRE, J. (1913). Destruction des Culicides ti l’aide du filet. Bull. Sot. 
7 97 from abroad. Zool. 
Amer. J. Publ. Hlth, 
Path. Exot. 6, 43-7. 
CH 
MEDICAL 
LEVER, R. J. A. W. (1946). Entomological notes. Agric. J. Fiji, 17, 9-15. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1955). The AL;des mosquitoes of the Sudan. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 164-73. 
LUTZ, A. and MACHADO, A. (1915). Viajem pelo rio S. Francisco, etc. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 
7, 5-50. 
MACARTHUR, W. P. (1923). Mosquito netting. J. R. Army Med. Cps, 40, l-l 1. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1916). Chlorine as a larvicide. Rep. Accra Laboratory for the year 1915, p. 71. 
Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 5, 47. 
MADDEN, A. H., LINDQUIST, A. W. and KNIPLING, A. F. (1945). DDT treatment of aeroplanes to 
prevent introduction of noxious insects. J. Econ. Ent. 38, 252-4. 
MELVILLE-DAVISON, W. (1912). Mosquito screening of ships. Yell. Fev. Bur. Bull. 2, 200-23. 
MISSIROLI, A. (1947). Riduzione o eradicazione degli Anofeli. Riv. Parasit. 8, 141-69. 
MOLLOY, D. M. (1924). Some personal experiences with fish as antimosquito agencies in the 
tropics. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 4, 175-94. 
MOOIJ, W. (1940). Malaria-prophylaxis in het Koninklijk Nederlandsch-Indische Leger. Geneesk. 
Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind. 80, 223-4. 
MOORE, W. and GRAHAM, S. A. (1918). A study of the toxicity of kerosene. J. Econ. Ent. 11, 
70-5. 
MOSNA, E. (1947). Su una caratteristica biologica de1 Culex pipiens autogeneticus di Latina. 
Riv. Parasit. 8, 125-6. 
MUIRHEAD THOMSON, R. C. (1947). The effect of house spraying with pyrethrum and with DDT 
on Anopheles gambiae and A. melas in West Africa. Bull. Ent. Res. 38, 449-64. 
MURRAY, D. R. P. (1936). Mineral oil in mosquito larvicides. Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 289-305. 
MYERS, G. S. (1926). Fishes and human disease. Fish Culturist, 5, 27-9. 
O’KANE, W. C. (1947). Results with benzene hexachloride. J. Econ. Ent. 40, 133-4. 
PAL, RAJINDAR. See RAJINDAR PAL. 
PARKER, E. A. and GREEN, A. A. (1947). DDT residual films. I. The persistence and toxicity of 
deposits from kerosene solutions on wall-board. Bull. Ent. Res. 38, 31 l-25. 
PRASHAD, B. and HORA, S. L. (1936). General review of the problem of larvivorous fishes of 
India. Rec. Mal. Surv. India, 6, 631-48. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1954a). Sorption of insecticides on porous surfaces. Bull. Nat. Sot. Znd. Mal. 
Mosq. Dis. 2, 177-9. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1954b). Particle size of insecticides in relation to biological efficiency. Bull. Nat. 
Sot. Ind. Mal. Mosq. Dis. 2, 180-l. 
RAJINDAR PAL and SHARMA, M. I. D. (1952). Rapid loss of biological efficiency of DDT applied 
to mud surfaces. Znd. J. Mal. 6, 251-63. 
RAJINDAR PAL, SHARMA, M. I. D. and KRISHNAMURTHY, B. S. (1932). Studies on the development 
of resistant strains of houseflies and mosquitoes. Znd. J. Mal. 6, 303-15. 
RIGOLLOT, S. (1927). A propos de la prophylaxie de la fievre jaune a la C&e Occidentale d’Afrique. 
Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 20, 859-65. 
RUSSELL, C. H. (1892). The best mosquito remedy. Insect Life, 4, 223-4. 
SEAL, W. P. (1908). Fishes and the mosquito problem. Sci. Amer. Suppl. 65, 351-2. 
SEVERO, 0. P. (1956a). Eradication of the Aedes aegypti mosquito from the Americas. Mosquito 
News, 16, 115-21. 
SEVERO, 0. P. (1956b). Acquired resistance to DDT in the Dominican Republic. Chron. World 
Hlth Org. 10, 347-54. 
SHANNON, W. R. (1943). An aid in the solution of the mosquito problem. Minn. Med. 26, 
799. 
SINTON, J. A. and WATS, R. C. (1935). The efficacy of various insecticidal sprays in the destruction 
of adult mosquitoes. Rec. Mal. Surv. India, 5, 275-306. 
SNEATH, P. A. T. (1939). Yellow fever in British Guiana. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 33, 
241-52. 
SOPER, F. L. (1938). See under (a) Yellow fever. 
SOPER, F. L., WILSON, D. B., LIMA, S. and ANTUNES, W. SA (1943). The organisation ofpermanent 
Nation-wide anti-Aedes aegypti measures in Brazil. Rockefeller Foundation, New York. 
98 
REFERENCES 
TANNER, W. F. (1931). Inspection of ships for determination of mosquito infestation. Publ. Hlth 
Rep., Wash. 46, 2306-20. 
THOMSON, M. R. C. See MUIRHEAD THOMSON. 
TRAVIS, B. V., MORTON, F. A. and COCHRAN, J. H. ( 1946). J. Econ. Ent. 39, 627-30. 
TURNER, J. G. S. (1946). Rep. Med. Dep. Gold Coast, 1945. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 37, p. 52. 
WILLIAMSON, K. B. (1924). The use of gases and vapours for killing mosquitoes breeding in wells. 
Trans. R. Sot. Prop. Med. Hyg. 17, 485-519. 
WILSON, C. S., MATHESON, D. R. and JACKOWSKIE, L. A. (1944). Ingested thiamin chloride as 
a mosquito repellent. Science, 100, 147. 
WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION. TECHNICAL REPORT SERIES, no. 110. Expert Committee on 
Insecticides. 6th Report. Technique of Spraying and Spray Apparatus. 
99 7-2 
V 
TECHNIQUE 
The particular technique employed by an observer naturally largely depends upon the 
facilities such observer has at his disposal, upon the nature of the work to be carried out 
and upon the personal preferences of the individual. In what follows various points in the 
technique of rearing and utilising Ai;des aegypti are given as they have been found suitable 
by the author using the species on a considerable scale over a number of years on work in 
determining the effectiveness of different repellents and of their preparations and in 
studying the bionomics of the species (Christophers, 1947). That the apparatus and methods 
described will necessarily be those best suited for some particular purpose of the reader 
can scarcely be expected. Thus it may at times be required merely to breed out small 
numbers of the species using little more than a suitable cage and a few ordinary laboratory 
articles and much that is said here will be irrelevant. On the other hand, much that is 
ambiguous or even contradictory in the literature may be largely avoided if care be taken 
to see that the material used is properly reared, of good quality and the conditions under 
which it is used, such as age from emergence and other relevant facts, given. Even if the 
technique here given is not followed there may be points of interest or usefulness to those 
commencing study of the species. The reader must therefore make his own selection in 
what follows of those items that may serve or assist in his technique. Besides the author’s 
own methods a number of references to the work of others will be found which may be 
useful to consult. Special techniques relating to particular methods of experimentation or 
preparation of material not dealt with here are given in later chapters. If more attention 
were given than is often the case to the use of standard material, well bred, with wing 
length or weight recorded, with the day from emergence or the blood feed noted (not 
a batch of unknown age fed on sugar!) much of the troublesome ambiguities so often 
recorded in the literature with this species would be avoided. 
(a) APPARATUS 
Breeding jars. For rearing larvae the usual laboratory glass basins are very suitable 
(Fig. 2 (3 A)). A size of about 15-20 cm. in diameter and about 10 cm. in height are con- 
venient for early stages of the culture or for a total of larvae up to about 500. Larger 
basins up to 30 cm. or more if they will go conveniently into the incubator may be used for 
larger numbers. A graduated wooden support in steps, as shown in the figure, is useful 
in collecting the pupae with the dish tilted. 
Meat dishes. Small glass dishes (potted meat dishes)* about 12 cm. in diameter and some 
5-6 cm. deep, or some suitable substitute, are almost essential for collecting the pupae for 
hatching out in the cages, for taking samples of larvae and many other purposes. They 
may usually be obtained in a Woolworth’s stores (Fig. 3 (7)). 
* Also used as butter dishes. 
100 
APPARATUS 
Collecting pipette. For removing larvae, collecting pupae, etc. a wide-mouthed pipette is 
useful. This consists of 6 in. of glass tubing of not more than 6 mm. bore provided with 
a rubber ball-teat preferably of 4 cm. diameter (Fig. 2 (3 c)). The distal opening may be 
very slightly narrowed and the cut edges smoothed in the flame. 
Collecting sieve. This is used to collect larvae or pupae in bulk. It consists of a 2 in. length 
of 1 in. diameter glass tubing with mosquito netting over one end held in place by a rubber 
band (Fig. 2 (3~)). When in use the end with the netting should be held beneath the surface 
to avoid damaging the larvae or pupae as these are pipetted in. 
Earthenware pots. These are of unglazed earthenware (known as rabbit feeding dishes). 
They are about 12 cm. in diameter and 7 cm. high with turned-in rim (Fig. 3 (5)). They are 
invaluable, not only for egg deposition and storage, but as humidifiers during emergence. 
Having a turned-in edge they give, when partly filled with water, conditions closely re- 
sembling those of the native water pot, a favourite breeding place in nature. Being rough 
they give good foothold and being porous they retain moisture after egg laying for some 
time after fluid has been removed, and, filled with water, they can be placed over other 
pots with eggs to keep these moist for the desired time. Eggs are laid in a heavy ring round 
the edges of the water and after conditioning and drying the pots can be broken and suit- 
able sized fragments with their attached eggs used for starting cultures. As humidifiers when 
filled with water they are much more effective than dishes of water, even if these are pro- 
vided with wet wool. They can be obtained from time to time at Woolworth’s stores. 
Air bubbling apparatus. Owing to the danger of scum formation a great deal of trouble will 
be saved if bubbling air can be used when culturing larvae. If available in the laboratory 
current air may be brought into the incubator through the thermometer hole and linked up 
by T-pieces with as many distributing tubes as required. The rate of bubbling should be 
controlled by screw clips, and it is a great convenience to have these set firmly in a vertical 
position on the rubber tube between two staples fixed on a largish cork, which has been 
cut to ride on the edge of the breeding dish (Fig. 2 (2)). It is important to insert an air 
gauge in the course of the main air supply tube (Fig. 2 (1)). This ensures uniform pressure. 
If this is not done, air will escape only in such a distributing tube as lies highest in water, 
making regulation difficult. 
If current air is not provided, it is possible to arrange for this by a small motor. Small 
motors for the purpose are to be obtained from firms catering for amateur aquaria (for 
example, Gamage’s). If air bubbling is not available, some other device must be sub- 
stituted (see section on the culture fluid), but it is a great and almost necessary convenience 
if work on any scale is being carried out. 
Cages. The simplest form of cage consists of a light wooden frame with sides of mosquito 
netting, having a wooden or metal base and with one side provided with a sleeve (see 
regarding construction of such below). The netting should be a rather fine mosquito net. 
That in ordinary use in the tropics may be used (about 14 by 16 meshes to the inch). But 
a finer netting as used in dress-making can be obtained and is probably safer (mesh about 
18 by 20 to the inch). The actual mesh aperture varies with the thickness of the cotton 
enclosing the mesh. A black netting of this kind is also available and is preferred by some 
as giving better visibility. The sleeve should be at least 18 in. long and rather voluminous. 
A glass side is also useful. 
101 
TECHNIQUE 
Recently cages have come into use with the sides, or the side with the sleeve, of plastic 
sheet. In this case the sleeve is usually attached to the edges of a circular opening cut in 
the sheet by being stitched to a length of slit rubber tubing. When the slit rubber is adjusted 
to the edge of the opening the rubber firmly grips the plastic. The sleeve attached to the 
frame, however, is more convenient for introducing and taking out dishes and is to be 
preferred. 
Cages need not be large, except for special purposes. An all-purpose cage, for breeding 
and use of a moderate number of mosquitoes, about 12 by 2 by 12 in. is very convenient as 
this will go easily in the incubator and allows of dishes being taken in and out. It is also 
not too large to make capturing mosquitoes by suction difficult. 
Whilst the above will serve for small-scale work any more extended research will be 
greatly facilitated by use of several sizes of cage designed for special purposes. Thus, for 
emergence, cages small enough for several to go at the same time into an incubator are very 
convenient. But these might not be suitable for later feeding or other purposes, for which 
larger and perhaps quite different forms of cages might be desirable. Hence for this and 
other reasons some method of being able readily to transfer the mosquitoes in bulk is a 
great convenience and only requires some thought given to construction of the cages to be 
used (see Fig. 3, which shows cages as used by the author). Another method which serves 
a slightly different purpose, namely removing mosquitoes as required from a stock cage, is 
that described by David, Bracey and Harvey (1944), who use a cage with a wooden roof in 
which is an opening closed by a sliding door. 
Large cages used for stock, except for some special reason, are not very desirable for 
ordinary work, but may serve a purpose. A cage designed to give a continuous supply of 
eggs for a large laboratory is described by Leeson (1932) and has proved very useful. It is 
- 
Figure 2. Technique. 
Air pressure regulating valve. The arrow indicates direction of air flow. 
Arrangement for pinchcock fixed on cork by staples for regulating rate of air bubbling on each 
air distributing tube. 
Apparatus used in collection of larvae and pupae. A, glass culture basin sloped for collection. 
The arrow shows direction of light from window; B, sieve; c, collecting pipette. 
Suction pipette for collection of adults. Simple form. a, collecting tube; b, glass mouthpiece 
at end of rubber suction tube. 
A more elaborate pipette for collecting and accurately chloroforming adults. Lettering as in 4. 
Specimen tube with filter paper strip resting in water as used for observing time of oviposition, 
number of eggs laid, etc. The double rubber band shown is a precaution-measure against 
spontaneous breaking of the small rubber bands used which sometimes occurs with loss of 
specimen. 
Mosquito hotel. Jar with cardboard shown lifted from hollow lid furnished with water, and 
paper-slip on cork. 
Method of mounting mosquitoes for transport. A, single mosquito mounted on cork strip; 
B, same put in tube with opening in cork closed by light wool pledget; c, tube put up with a 
number of mounted specimens; D, showing how cork strip is pinned to cork. 
Apparatus for rearing and feeding mosquitoes as used at the Molten0 Institute (Tate). 
a, hole in mosquito netting cover plugged with wool for removal of mosquitoes by suction 
pipette; b, rivet holding bent metal sheet in place and giving some latitude to movements of 
lower part; c, one of three supporting nuts on inner side of metal to engage over milk dish 
(unshaded portion below). 
102 
6 
8 a II 
! : 
: : 
IT I4 b / 
4 
Figure 2 
103 
TECHNIQUE 
a large cage with permanent accommodation for a guinea-pig. The roof of the animal’s 
quarters forms a shelf on which is a breeding tank kept automatically at a desired tempera- 
ture by means of a thermostatically controlled electric bulb. Continuity of supply may 
also be arranged for through ability of A?des eggs to retain vitality for several weeks or 
longer (see later on manipulation of eggs). For description of equipment for continuous 
rearing of A. aegypti, see Bacot (1916); Buxton and Hopkins (1927); Putnam and Shannon 
(1934); H. A. Johnson (1937); David et al. (1944); Christophers (1947); Burchfield, Redder, 
Storrs and Hilchey (1954). 
Special cages and equipment may be required for special purposes. Stokes, Bauer and 
Hudson (1928) describe a cage used for feeding monkeys in yellow fever work; see also 
Sellards (1932); Shannon (1939) ; Barnett (1955); Ross (1956). Snijders, Dinger and 
Schuffner (1931) describes cages used in work on dengue transmission. Nieschulz and 
Du Toit (1934) describe cages used in veterinary studies using A. aegypti. 
Not all authors, however, in their techniques use cages of the ordinary kind. For some 
purposes the simple apparatus and procedures given by Stephens and Christophers (1908) 
in handling a few mosquitoes still hold good and are referred to later. Yolles and Knigin 
(1943) use a celluloid cylinder with a rubber diaphragm and a slit for inserting a tube. 
Young and Burgess (1946) use a plastic sheet 22 by 10 in. bent into a semi-cylinder and 
tacked on a wooden base 10 in. square, the back being of transparent celluloid and the 
front of netting. Trembley (1944a) uses for oviposition lamp glasses kept over petri dishes 
with wet wool. Fifty fed females can be added or mosquitoes can be fed through the netting 
covering the top. 
A system which is in use at the Molten0 Institute, Cambridge, for work on bird malaria 
and other studies and found very satisfactory employs for emergence, feeding and ovi- 
position cylinders of sheet metal 6 in. in diameter and 6 in. high resting on flat enamel 
pans (milk dishes) (see Tate and Vincent, 1936). The cylinder is made of a metal sheet 
bent into a cylinder held by a rivet only at the top. The bottom of the cylinder can therefore 
be readily adjusted to grip the dish. The grip if necessary can be further strengthened by 
a rubber band or clip. Three small projections (rivets) near the bottom prevent the edge of 
the cylinder sinking more than a certain distance beyond the rim of the dish (Fig. 2 (9)). 
Figure 3. Technique. 
Type B cage. a, sleeve; b, sliding zinc door. Note handle formed by outer edge rolled back- 
wards; c, edge of cardboard strip as used to give socket room for door and glass planes; 
d, nut and bolt to prevent door being accidentally pulled from its socket; e, screw to retain 
glass pane in position. 
The roof is shown reinforced by wire netting for use with rabbit feeding attachment. 
Type A cage. Lettering as for 1. 
To show details of construction of cages. A, screw for glass panes; B, showing sliding socket 
for door made from strips of bent zinc sheet; or socket may be merely gap left when outer 
slat is separated from the cage frame by a thick strip of cardboard; c, socket for glass pane 
formed by strip of cardboard (c); D, bolt near edge of door to prevent total withdrawal. 
Rabbit feeding attachment. The dotted areas are sorbo rubber resting on wooden floor. 
Twice scale of 1. 
Porous pot (rabbit feeding pot) referred to as ‘egg-pot ‘. 
Fragment of same with portion of egg rim as used for starting a culture. 
Glass dish (meat dish; butter cooler dish). 
L 6 
lin. 
Figure 3 
TECHNIQUE 
Pupae are placed in the dish to hatch out in the incubator. Feeding is done by the bird or 
small animal being laid on the netting at the top of the cylinder with some portion of 
bare skin touching this. The mosquitoes oviposit freely around the dish giving an abundant 
supply for immediate breeding or holding in stock. 
Cages as used by the author. The cages are of two types, namely, small cages of which a 
number can be used if necessary in the incubator at the same time for emergence and for 
holding adults until ready for testing or experiment (type A cage); and larger cages of a 
size found suitable for testing, feeding, oviposition or such other purposes as may be 
carried out (type B cages). Manipulation is avoided by having both types of cage with a 
sliding sheet metal door and a frame which will allow the doors of any two cages to be 
brought flush. Both type A and type B cages are made with a matchboard base and a 
wooden frame of 1 in. scantling. Type A cages are small cubical cages measuring 8; by 
Sft- by 8i in. One side is furnished with a sleeve 18 in. long and of ample width. Opposite 
to this is the sliding door. The remaining sides are covered with mosquito netting or a 
substitute and, especially if muslin is used, one side is fitted with a glass sheet. All fittings 
are by means of light wooden slats lightly nailed in place. Type B cages are of similar 
construction but measure 14 by 8; by 12 in. high. One side or better both are of glass. 
The cages can be made by any amateur carpenter and stand up well against rough wear. 
The floor should be of smooth wood. The door may have its inner end bent into a roll to 
give convenient grip and should have a small bolt and nut set near its outer edge to prevent 
accidental withdrawal of the door from its bed when in use. The construction of the cages 
will be clear from the figure (Fig. 3 (l-3)). 
With type A cages the hatched-out adults from the pupae placed in the cage can be 
retained under suitable conditions until such time as they are ready for experiment. Up to 
200 adults are readily accommodated without overcrowding. As many as eight such cages 
could, if required, be accommodated in a large incubator. At time of experiment a few 
moments suffices to transfer all the mosquitoes in the small cage to some form of type B 
cage. All that is necessary is to place the larger cage against some support and, holding the 
smaller cage firmly in place with the door frames in apposition, to open both doors and 
agitate the sleeve until all mosquitoes have been transferred. That the door of the large 
cage occupies only the lower half of the end favours the non-return of any mosquito that 
has once entered the large cage. To facilitate opening the doors those on type A cages can 
be set in an opposite direction to those on type B cages. A clamp to hold both cages firmly 
together can be used (Christophers, 1947), but is not necessary. By a very simple adapta- 
tion, as noted later, a cage of type B can be fitted for feeding mosquitoes on a rabbit for 
oviposition. By the adoption of such a system as that described and with the aid of one 
or two minor accessory pieces of apparatus techniques of almost any kind can be greatly 
simplified. 
Mosquito aspirator pipette. Apart from transfer in bulk it is often required to remove 
a few specimens for observation or certain forms of experiment. For this purpose Buxton 
(1928) uses a length of 1 in. diameter glass tube with a rubber cork at each end into which 
are inserted respectively a piece of glass tube of suitable length and bore for aspirating 
adults from a cage and a short piece to which can be attached a length of rubber tubing for 
suction. This last-mentioned piece of tubing has its inner end protected by a piece of 
mosquito netting held in place by a small rubber band (Fig. 2 (4)). 
106 
APPARATUS 
A somewhat more elaborate, but very useful arrangement of this kind has been found 
suitable for many purposes and is illustrated in Fig. 2 (5). This consists of a 6 in. boiling 
tube with a rubber cork in which is set both a long collecting and a short sucking tube which 
is either bent sharply to face back to the operator or a piece of wire is inserted in the rubber 
to prevent it buckling. The collecting tube should fit in the cork hole easily so that it can 
be readily replaced by a small funnel by means of which mosquitoes in the tube can be 
accurately anaesthetised by placing a small piece of wool in the funnel and adding a drop 
or so of chloroform. By sucking gently and watching the mosquitoes they can be anaes- 
thetised to any desired degree and turned out. Or the funnel can be replaced by a bent tube 
and the mosquitoes without being anaesthetised blown gently into any desired receptacle. 
Attachment for feeding on rabbit. For feeding mosquitoes in cages it is now a common 
practice to immobilise some small animal (guinea-pig or rabbit) with nembutal and place 
in the mosquito cage. In this case no special apparatus is required other than a small 
cradle to facilitate the operation (see later under feeding for stock). It has been found, 
however, that better feeds are given using a rabbit and that with so large an animal it is 
convenient, whether the animal is immobilised or not, to use a suitable attachment that 
can be fixed when required on a cage B type, the mosquitoes feeding through the gauze roof. 
Or one such cage can be kept permanently fitted with the device. The attachment consists 
of a padded board made to fit and to some extent to grip the top of a type B cage which 
has been previously fitted with wire netting under the muslin of the roof. A suitable space 
is left in the middle to the sides of which are attached canvas straps, each about 4; in. 
wide with the ends cut narrower to enter the buckles (pig. 3 (1)). A rabbit is placed on the 
board and the buckles adjusted to hold the animal firmly but comfortably in position. To 
ensure this the straps should be brought up from the inner sides of the frame as shown in 
the figure. The hair over a portion of the abdomen is previously clipped or shaved, or 
preferably removed by one of the patent hair removers. A period of fifteen minutes is 
allowed for feeding. Very heavy feeds may be obtained in this way. 
Killing chamber. It is not easy to kill off mosquitoes in a cage without some adequate form 
of killing chamber or having cages out of action for sufficiently long to ensure death of all 
the mosquitoes which may take several days. Such a chamber can be made of ply-wood on 
a strong wooden frame just large enough to take type B cages. It is convenient to have a 
down-closing sliding door. Under the roof there should be sufficient space to fix a wire 
netting partition on the top of which can be placed a thickish pad of filter paper or other 
absorbent. Two holes are cut in the roof furnished with corks for adding the lethal agent. 
The amount of this substance (chloroform or, cheaper, carbon tetrachloride) necessary to 
ensure complete lethal effect in, say, 15 minues can be ascertained and this amount used 
as a routine. For a killing chamber just large enough to take cages of the size noted 30 ml. 
of carbon tetrachloride was found necessary. 
Forms. In any full-scaled research using considerable numbers of the species suitable 
printed or duplicated forms with spaces for relevant information, such as date, specifica- 
tion of the batch from which mosquitoes were taken and other information, will not only 
greatly reduce the labour of keeping notes but will avoid hiatuses in recordings. 
107 
TECHNIQUE 
(b) THE CULTURE MEDIUM 
In early observations on the species bred in the laboratory eggs were placed to hatch and 
develop in conditions supposed to resemble those of their natural breeding places. 
MacGregor (1915), commencing his study of the most suitable form of culture fluid, 
placed a new strain he had received in tap water to which had been added ‘fallen leaves and 
dry twigs’. The unsuitability of such a fluid is very apparent from the statement made by 
the author that some larvae remained in ‘suspended development’ from early June to late 
August, that is the conditions were those for rearing ‘ starvation forms’ as described in a 
later chapter. Later MacGregor (1929) experimented with a number of other media. 
Those media consisting exclusively of sugar or starches were useless. A medium of lacto- 
peptone was fairly satisfactory. Media containing egg albumen or egg yolk gave variable 
results depending upon the degree of contamination, 0.1 per cent egg yolk being lethal if 
on decomposition it yielded H2S. Boiled oatmeal was satisfactory but growth slow. 
Powdered bean was fairly good. Of all the materials tried the most successful were bemax 
(excellent at 0.1 to 3-O per cent if the medium did not become acid) and different forms of 
bread, namely standard, brown and white (the last not quite so good). Of standard and 
brown bread the author remarks that the medium apparently contained all that is necessary 
for vigorous larval growth. 
Bacot (1916) early notes that larvae develop readily in water containing a plentiful 
supply of organic matter. 
Buxton and Hopkins (1927) tried out infusion of hay, rice or bran, diluted and allowed 
to rot. They found the most suitable medium to be ‘grass infusion’. It was recognised that 
bacterial growth took place (Buxton and Hopkins, 1925). These authors made some 
pertinent comments on the advantages and disadvantages of different ‘organic fluids’ 
The advantage of bran, meal and starches is that these substances are easily weighed and 
have a fairly definite composition. It is almost useless to weigh grass as a large and varying 
proportion of it is water. Hay also may consist of different grasses. The present author also 
found that the value of hay for this purpose varied greatly with its age and conditions under 
which it had been kept. In regard to bran the above authors noted that it has the dis- 
advantage of growing a thick scum. Their studies indicated that on the whole the best 
medium is dilute grass infusion. They did not claim that the medium is other than a source 
of bacterial food. 
The work of Trager (1935) and others working on essential food requirements of A&Yes 
aegypti larvae (see ch. XI, section (g)) later showed that, whilst it is possible to rear larvae 
up to emergence under sterile conditions there are considerable difficulties such as are 
entirely absent using fluids with an abundant bacterial flora and that normally the presence 
of living bacteria and yeasts is necessary to provide certain essential food elements. That 
solutes or colloidal material in dispersion are to any extent available for food and that 
larvae can grow to any extent in such substances as sterile nutrient broth has also been 
negatived by the experience of several authors (for example, Hinman, 1930, 1932). 
Briefly, then, the requirements of a good culture medium would appear to be that it 
should be a fluid providing continued bacterial growth, but without such excessive fermen- 
tation and formation of scum and harmful products as will be prejudicial to the larvae. 
Bread, usually in the form of dried bread crumbs sprinkled on the surface, has been the 
food most usually employed. Shannon and Putnam (1934) used tap water with dried bread, 
108 
THE CULTURE MEDIUM 
either exclusively or with dried blood serum. Trembley (1944a) used oat grains cut in half 
(12-30 grains per tray of 3 litres) alone or with dog biscuit put in 12-24 hours in advance. 
Or 150 C.C. from an old pan was added daily. David, Bracey and Harvey (1944), whilst they 
found powdered bread satisfactory, obtained the best results with a breadcrumb infusion. 
This was allowed to ferment for five days at 20” C., shaking daily and before being used 
was strained through voile, warmed and aerated. Other forms of food used in the rearing 
of mosquito larvae, including A. aegypti, have been heated yeast (Tate and Vincent, 1936); 
finely ground lentils (De Boissezon, 1933); piscidin, a proprietary fish food consisting of 
powdered flies (Martini, 1921; Weyer, 1934; James, private communication); a powdered 
breakfast food found more convenient than yeast (H. A. Johnson, 1937); and probably 
others, though the comparative value of these mostly rests on the fact that they did serve 
for culture, it being rare in the literature for measurement of size or weight of the mosquitoes 
reared to be given. Weyer (1934), however, notes that a larval diet of blood and liver 
produced vigorous males and females. 
With the present author no food has given such consistently good results as a modifi- 
cation of that used in Professor Buxton’s laboratory, namely a finely ground proprietary 
dog biscuit (see Lumsden, 1947). The modification used has been the addition of bemax 
and a standardised method of preparation and usage. The biscuit used has been Entwistle’s 
Puppy Meal. This consists as purchased in the market of a mixture of broken fragments of 
an ordinary yellow hard biscuit and of a brown biscuit which contains a little bone meal 
and probably other ingredients considered suitable for dogs. The makers, Entwistle Ltd, 
Vulcan Mills, Liverpool, have, however, on request very kindly supplied these two con- 
stituents separately in seven-pound bags. Otherwise if bought on the market the yellow 
biscuit is in excess. Preparation of the food is as follows. 
Equal parts of yellow biscuit, brown biscuit and bemax are separately finely ground and 
well mixed, fineness being assured by sifting through fine mosquito netting. For large 
quantities a mincing machine is helpful, though the final grinding is best done by rubbing 
up in a mortar. This finely ground powder is kept as stock, being used as required. When 
preparing culture medium a small quantity, say two piled teaspoonfuls, are rubbed up with 
a little water into a paste and then diluted to form a suspension of which desired quantities 
are added to tap water. Enough should be added in the first place to give, eventually, a 
good turbidity, that is, one in which, seen through the glass, larvae are only visible when 
they approach close to this. The culture fluid may be clear when freshly made, due to 
settling, but later becomes increasingly turbid. If a heavy scum forms in spite of gently 
bubbling air, too much of the food has been added for the number of larvae present. If 
overnight the culture becomes dark and transparent, too little food is being given or there 
is overcrowding. An appropriate quantity is added daily or from time to time to maintain 
conditions as they should be. Changing the water daily as is sometimes recommended is 
to be avoided. But as the larvae increase in size larger receptacles may conveniently be 
brought into use and so a certain amount of fresh water comes to be added during progress 
of the culture. Where bubbling air is not used, an attempt may be made to add just sufficient 
food to keep scum from forming. Close attention is required, however, as one night’s scum 
may kill off the larvae, especially when still in the young stages or as pupae. Another way 
is to rear at a lower temperature. 
109 
TECHNIQUE 
(c) REARING AND MAINTENANCE 
The following is the procedure followed by the author in rearing AZdes aegypti. 
A fragment of egg-pot with what is judged to be an appropriate supply of eggs (see 
section (6)) is sunk in a suitably sized deepish glass basin (say a meat dish or suitable 
vessel to take the piece of pot) filled with tap water to which about one-third of its volume 
of old culture fluid from a recent brew and a trace of food has been added. The preparation 
is then left overnight at 28” C. with gently bubbling air. By the morning the great majority 
of eggs that have been conditioned as described later will have hatched. Older eggs may 
take somewhat longer, but are best not used if more recent eggs are available. The old 
culture fluid is not essential, but it helps to ensure rapid and uniform hatching. 
Suitable hatching having occurred, the larvae with the fluid in the dish are turned into 
a larger dish of tap water at 28” C. and a suitable amount of food suspension added. As 
growth takes place the larvae and contents are transferred en bloc if necessary to a larger 
dish. Dishes up to 5 litres or more may be used, but it is thought that those of about 
3 litres are optimum. About up to 250 larvae per litre can be safely reared without any 
fear of overcrowding. A certain concentration seems desirable. If the number hatched is 
in excess, the excess should be removed with the pipette where they lie accumulated at the 
side of the dish away from the light. This may require to be done from time to time as the 
excess becomes apparent. After a little experience a rough estimate can be made about the 
second day as to what thinning out is required. 
When the majority of larvae have pupated, usually about the sixth day, pupae are 
pipetted out and placed in clean water at 28” C. in meat dishes in cages of type A for 
emergence in the incubator. To ensure humidity so that there shall be little or no mortality 
a few porous egg-pots filled with water are placed in the incubator along with the cages. 
This is the time when counting for future experimentation is done. As a routine it is 
convenient to have each small cage put up with, say, 100 pupae of a given sex. It is then 
always possible later when transferring the mosquitoes to know what numbers are being 
used. Even if this is not required it is convenient to have small unit cages to work with. 
This is the time too for putting aside a sufficient stock of the old culture fluid for use later. 
Emergence is complete in about 48 hours from collection of the pupae and when so 
completed cages can be removed to a lower temperature, each cage being provided with a 
filter paper fan slipped into its dish. .This ensures humidity and gives ready access to water 
for drinking. Later when the dishes are removed counts of pupal skins can be made if 
desired to check the cage contents. If clean water has been used for the pupae and high 
humidity ensured during emergence, there should be at this time practically no mortality. 
Cages can now be left, say at 25” C. and moderate humidity (70 per cent relative humi- 
dity), until the fifth day from emergence when the mosquitoes are suitable for testing or 
feeding. The use of sugar, fruit, etc. in the cages with the idea of maintaining the mosquitoes 
alive is objectionable from several points of view. In the first case it is not necessary since 
the mosquitoes, if treated as above and given water to drink, do not begin to show mor- 
tality, except for some males, until about the seventh day and to use mosquitoes beyond 
the seventh day from emergence, except for a special purpose, is again undesirable. Further 
to give food other than water is to introduce a distinctly disturbing factor, as it may seriously 
reduce biting urge and possibly have other effects. Shannon (1939) found that 22, 35 and 
56 per cent respectively fed in three series treated as follows: fed on sugar up to time of 
II0 
REARING AND MAINTENANCE 
feed; sugar removed three days before feed; mosquitoes 2-3 days old with only water. 
Water to drink (and preferably with a filter paper fan), however, is essential and adults 
soon die if this is not provided. 
In a few days the cages are ready for experiment. The fifth day is the most suitable time 
for this as the mosquitoes are now uniformly hungry and excitable and there should be as 
yet no appreciable mortality except among the males. Offered food, for example the 
human arm, the percentage feeding should approach 100 per cent. Normally if being 
tested the mosquitoes from a small cage of females and one of males are transferred to a 
cage type B and before use are exposed without water for one hour to bright electric light. 
A word may be said here as to the use of the expression ‘first, second or third day’ when 
referring to age of mosquitoes. By ‘first day’ is here meant some time on the day following 
any operation, such as putting eggs to hatch, the day of the operation being day 0. Buxton 
and Hopkins use the same convention. Most usually the condition described as that on 
any particular day relates to the time of morning inspection, the operation having been 
done some time during the previous day. Whilst very rough, it is useful where exactness is 
not important. Otherwise time is best given in hours. 
(d) FEEDING FOR EGG STOCK 
When arranging for egg supply it is convenient to carry out emergence with a few hundred 
male and female pupae sieved out in bulk and placed in a meat dish with clean water in 
a B-type cage (that with the rabbit attachment if this has been set aside for the purpose). 
When emergence is completed filter paper fans are inserted into the dishes and the cage left 
preferably to the fifth day for feeding. Feeding may be done on the human arm, but use 
of a rabbit is preferable. The guinea-pig has not been found to give such satisfactory feeds. 
Fielding (19 19) notes the same experience. An hour before the feed, water should be 
removed and the cage exposed to the light of a lamp. 
The animal used for feeding may be immobilised with nembutal or not. In either case 
it will be found convenient to use the feeding attachment. Hair over the abdomen should 
be cropped or shaved. The animal is then laid comfortably on the attachment with the 
abdomen against the gauze roof of the cage. Usually if performed quietly the animal lies 
still. Fifteen minutes should be given for the feed. 
I am indebted to Mr Shute of the Ministry of Health Malaria Laboratory for the 
following notes on the use of nembutal. 
The drug used for immobilising guinea-pigs, rabbits and monkeys is veterinary NEMBUTAL 
(Pentobarbital sodium). Each cc. contains one grain of Nembutal alcohol 10 per cent. It can be 
used intraperitoneally and intravenously. For complete sedation use 1-O C.C. (one grain) for 
each 5 lb. body weight. It is a product of Abbot Laboratories. For fairly large animals, such as 
rabbits or monkeys, it is best to give it intravenously, very slowly, and stop as soon as the animal 
becomes immobilised, a matter of seconds. For guinea-pigs the drug may be given intraperitoneally 
and by this route it takes 5 to 15 minutes to work. With monkeys it may take even longer. Im- 
mobilisation lasts from 2 to 6 hours. Small cradles may be used for guinea-pigs in which they lie 
while resting in the mosquito cages. The same animal can be used over and over again if care be 
exercised to give the right dose according to body weight. A patch over the abdomen of guinea- 
pigs should be closely cropped, but for monkeys no clipping is necessary. 
After the feed, fresh glass meat dishes with water and filter paper fans are left in the cage 
for the first two or three days and then replaced by earthenware egg pots about one-third 
III 
TECHNIQUE 
filled with water. These are not placed directly on the floor of the cage, but raised on empty 
meat dishes. Otherwise a great many eggs may be laid on the floor where this has been 
wetted by leakage from the pots. By not placing the earthenware egg pots in position at 
the beginning, much contamination with post-feed faeces is avoided. In nature there may 
be some selection by the female in depositing her eggs on water of different characters. 
But in the laboratory there does not appear to be any necessity to make provision for this, 
since females oviposit freely in captivity on clean tap-water. More important is the 
character of the vessel, a point referred to later when dealing with manipulation of the eggs. 
Oviposition is practically completed by the seventh day from feed, when pots are 
removed, the water pipetted off and the pots, after labelling, put aside for the eggs to be 
conditioned. Being porous the pots take a day or two to become dry, which allows time 
for the conditioning of most of the eggs, these having probably been laid on the fourth or 
fifth day after the feed. To make quite sure, however, the precaution can be taken to place 
a pot filled with water above one or more of the pots with eggs, removing this in a day or 
two and allowing the pots with eggs to become quite dry. 
The pots are emptied on the seventh day because even the earliest laid eggs (those laid 
on the third day) will not by then have had time to hatch. Beyond the eighth day there will 
be heavy losses from hatching. 
Eggs being conditioned should not be kept too moist, that is wet, or there may be 
serious loss from larvae that have cut the egg cap, but have not emerged, and so will 
eventually die from desiccation when the eggs are allowed to dry. 
If filter paper is used for oviposition, special care is required to ensure that the eggs have 
been kept moist sufficiently long to ensure conditioning. This is probably most readily 
done by keeping the filter paper on wet wool as is done by the American observers. 
Egg pots when stored should be protected from psoci, cockroaches, ants and other 
possible marauding insects by being placed one above the other standing upon an up- 
turned flower pot standing in a vessel of water. Oil, as less likely to evaporate, can be used 
instead of water, but is apt to be both messy and dangerous. The time the eggs remain 
viable depends a good deal on the humidity. The time is much shorter in ordinary room 
conditions than when kept in a constant temperature room with a humidity of 70. The 
extent to which stored eggs are still viable can be judged by examining them under a low 
power. If still plump and rounded, they will certainly be viable. Eggs properly conditioned 
and kept at reasonable humidity should retain their viability for some weeks at least with- 
out appreciable deterioration and give good results in hatching up to three or four months. 
If kept too moist, they are apt to become infected with psoci or mites. 
The resistance of conditioned eggs to desiccation makes this much the best form in 
which to transmit material for culture. Eggs may be sent by post on dry filter paper or 
on small pieces of pot from a broken-up egg pot.* 
(e) MANIPULATION OF EGGS 
Shannon and Putnam (1934) have specially investigated the results of different ways of 
conditioning eggs. They keep those laid on filter paper on wet wool for several days in the 
open so that they dry very slowly. Trembley (19443) allows eggs to be laid on filter paper 
* For egg production Kneirim, Lea, Dimond and De Long (1955) feed mosquitoes on preserved 
Lang and Wallis (1956). Whether such procedure is useful or not may depend on circumstances. blood, as also do 
112 
MANIPULATION OF EGGS 
placed on moist cullocotton pads in the dishes that form the base of her lamp glass cages. 
They are stored after being kept moist for 2-3 days at room temperature in covered con- 
tainers and then dried in the open air. H. A. Johnson (1937) in place of filter paper uses 
pieces of sponge that can be dried and put away. At the Molten0 Institute, Cambridge, 
in the method of employing mosquitoes described by Tate and Vincent (1936), eggs, 
after feeding of the mosquitoes, are laid on and around the edges of the water in shallow 
enamel pans used as the bottom of the feeding cage. As these dishes dry up eggs remain 
moist sufficiently long to become for the most part conditioned. Blanc and Caminopetros 
(1929) place in the cage of fed mosquitoes porous earthenware vessels containing water. 
The eggs are deposited on the outside of the pot. Earthenware pots as used by the author 
have already been noted. 
When not properly conditioned a certain number of eggs become dry and shrunken. 
But during the operation of being put to hatch these eggs swell up and appear as unhatched 
eggs (see later under ‘swollen eggs’, p. 143, and may give a false impression that these 
were resistant eggs, that is still viable eggs that did not hatch. 
MICROSCOPIC STUDY OF EGGS 
The above remarks relate to a supply of eggs for culture. There are, however, a number of 
other ways of manipulating eggs when the object is to prepare these for various research 
purposes. One useful method for many purposes is to collect the film of floating eggs left 
after oviposition in the meat dish used. If this is to be done, a glass pot (meat dish) should 
be placed in the cage for oviposition instead of an earthenware pot. The glass sides of the 
dish being not very suitable for the insect to oviposit from, the great majority of eggs will 
now be laid on the surface of the water. To collect these a grease-free cover-glass, prefer- 
ably a long one such as is used for mounting serial sections, is used. This is slipped under 
the film of eggs and a portion of this lifted out. The eggs being uniformly oriented with the 
ventral surface uppermost, such preparations are very suitable for making measurements, 
studying egg structure or for demonstration purposes. This is also a way of obtaining a 
number of undamaged eggs for research purposes. The cover-glass is examined under the 
microscope and any damaged or abnormal eggs together with debris removed. The eggs 
which have passed inspection are then swept off with a fine brush into a pot of water. 
Never having dried, such eggs will be intact as regards the chorion, which is not the case 
with eggs detached after being allowed to dry on any surface. 
The thick band of eggs deposited round the water’s edge in an earthenware egg-pot is 
also another useful source of eggs whilst these are still moist, for the eggs, not yet being 
cemented, can be removed with a fine brush without damage and used for many purposes, 
such as observing hatching under the microscope, weighing eggs, etc. (see pp. 139-40). 
Usually the eggs from this band, especially after a heavy oviposition, in the still moist 
condition give very clean preparations of eggs free from debris. Even when dry, however, 
this band is a very useful source of eggs for some purposes, it being simply necessary to 
brush them off with a camel hair brush. Though the chorion may be damaged, this does not 
affect their viability. 
Eggs on filter paper are not so suitable for the above purposes as they tend to be adherent 
to the fibres of the paper. Eggs laid by isolated females on strips of filter paper are, 
8 113 CH 
TECHNIQUE 
however, very useful for many purposes, such as ascertaining the number of eggs laid, 
viability of these, etc. 
A common trouble with eggs, even those only momentarily dry, is that when placed in 
water they then tend to float and are difficult to submerge. The following is applicable to 
either moist or dry eggs in overcoming this difficulty. Brush off the eggs into a little water 
in a watch-glass or small glass pot. Using a pipette and teat, swish the water in and out 
until it is seen that the majority of the eggs have sunk. Now give the watch-glass a rotary 
movement to bring these sunk eggs in one spot. They can now be easily taken up in a 
pipette and transferred to where required. 
To obtain undamaged eggs free from fluid, pipette out eggs on to a fine-grained porous 
tile. By passing them out of the pipette mouth at one spot a little heap of moist eggs free 
from fluid can be obtained. 
Pipettes used for manipulating eggs should be kept thoroughly cleaned with acid, as 
otherwise eggs are very liable to adhere to the inside of the pipette and cause difficulty. 
To bleach eggs, treat as above and, bringing them together by rotatory movement of the 
pot or dish, transfer to 1 in 5 diaphanol (or other bleaching fluid), leaving them in this 
until the desired effect is produced. For bleaching still viable eggs to observe the act of 
hatching, see p. 158. For sterilisation of viable eggs, see p. 151. 
For all observations dealing with the black and opaque eggs of A. aegypti some form of 
direct illumination by a strong beam of light, used from as high an angle as the objective 
will permit, is essential. The use of a Lieberkuhn’s parabolic reflector is recommended by 
James (1923) for this purpose. The author has used a Baker’s ‘high intensity low voltage’ 
microscope lamp which serves well. The background should not be white or the glare will 
give poor definition. A black matt surface gives, when strongly illuminated, a nice grey 
contrast background. An upright piece of white card to reflect diffused light on the part 
of the egg in shadow improves the effect. 
MOUNTING EGGS 
Eggs may be mounted for the purpose of showing the egg characters or to show the later 
embryological changes. For the first purpose, however, mosquito eggs offer almost insur- 
mountable difficulty as when put up in a medium some of the most striking characters of 
the exochorion no longer show up. Eggs of A. aegypti mounted in gum or other medium 
show little of the appearances of the unmounted egg suitably illuminated. Suitably bleached 
and treated egg-shells are most suitable to show the chorionic structure (see under descrip- 
tion of egg characters given later). For methods of mounting to show embryological 
characters, see chapter VII. 
Pick (1950), after he had shown that eggs of A. aegypti laid on silica-gel medium remain 
viable up to seven months, has found that eggs may even be mounted in a viable condition 
in such medium, 50 per cent hatching out after thirty days. The method of preparing the 
medium is given by the author. 
114 
TECHNIQUE 
(f) MANIPULATION OF LARVAE AND PUPAE 
Examination of living larvae. Larvae as required are pipetted out from the culture using the 
pipette already described. Where a mass sample is being taken at a given time or stage of 
culture for weighing, larvae may be pipetted out where they have congregated away from 
the light, and decanted from the pipette into clean water in a dish facing the light (for 
example, a window), the pipette being emptied on the side towards the light. On entering 
the water the larvae swim rapidly away from the light, whilst any debris or sediment falls 
to the bottom where the pipette is emptied. The larvae are then pipetted out from where 
they have collected free from debris and filtered off in a small funnel on to filter paper. The 
mass so obtained is then tipped on to a smooth porous tile, one portion being then weighed, 
whilst another portion is immediately killed by boiling water and is used for determining 
the percentages of the different instars, etc. Pressure at any stage should be carefully 
avoided since this may detach anal papillae and so lead to loss of body fluid. By 
such means, and measurements made as described later, growth in cultures can be 
followed. 
To obtain larvae at the stages immediately before and immediately following upon 
ecdysis it was found very helpful to pipette out a mass of, say, fifty larvae from a culture 
in which the desired ecdysis was in active progress and to examine this rapidly on a glass 
plate under a low power. The pre-ecdysis forms are at once detected by the dark hairs of 
the oncoming instar wrapped round the thorax under the cuticle as described later. For the 
post-ecdysis stages pre-ecdysis forms were collected and kept under observation, larvae at 
the desired stage being removed as they were observed to undergo ecdysis. The larvae at this 
stage are very strikingly distinguished by the almost completely transparent head. Before 
measuring it is desirable to give a few minutes for the parts to adjust themselves as they 
may be deformed somewhat immediately following ecdysis. By pre- and post-ecdysis is 
always meant forms just about to ecdyse, or that have just completed ecdysis respectively, 
these being the only times at which measurements of soft parts can be made corresponding 
to a particular stage in development. 
For measuring larvae for body length some method of ensuring immobilisation is 
necessary. For killing without change or distortion the method described later with 
formalin vapour is that giving the most perfect result. But though excellent for preparing 
larvae for mounting, it is too lengthy a process for measuring numbers of larvae at different 
stages of growth. Living larvae can be immobilised by flooding them on to filter paper, 
but they are usually not well set out for measurement. Gerberich (1945) describes a method 
using 10 per cent solution of methyl cellulose in the form known as methocel (manufactured 
by Dow Chemical Co., Midland, Michigan. Viscosity type XX low; see also Science, 
5 Nov. 1943). One drop of the solution is placed in the hollow of a hollow slide. The 
larva, with not more than one drop of water, is then added and the water and methocel 
mixed. The slide is left for 20 minutes for the water to evaporate. The larva at first moves 
about but later becomes quiescent. Larvae can be kept alive in high humidity in such a 
condition for 24 hours without injury. 
Bates (1949) used iced water for immobilising larvae. The author has found the most 
generally satisfactory method for use in measuring larvae for growth studies as given later 
to be very careful chloroforming of the larvae on a glass plate until they just cease moving. 
For body length those are selected which lie with the body extended in a straight line. 
115 8-2 
TECHNIQUE 
Killing larvae for mounting. For mounting without distortion so that preparations can be 
made suitable for drawing or for reference, the most satisfactory method of killing is as 
follows. Larvae are placed in a shallow dish with a suitable depth of 2 per cent formalin 
to allow them to rest normally at the surface and covered with a glass sheet on which is a 
filter paper wetted with pure formalin. It may take several hours to kill the larvae, which, 
however, mainly die still floating at the surface and with the respiratory parts at the end of 
the siphon fully expanded. After 24 hours the fluid is changed to 4 per cent, care being 
taken not to sink the larvae. After another 24 hours the larvae are brought through 
graded alcohols to xylol, using the xylol, and eventually the canada balsam, also in graded 
proportions. A small opening in an unimportant part of the body wall will greatly facilitate 
these later operations. 
Mounting larvae. Larvae can be mounted in balsam, gum, Bhatia’s fluid or other medium. 
They can also be brought without shrinkage into pure glycerine by the method described 
by Buxton and Hopkins (1927), and thence mounted in glycerine jelly. Buxton and 
Hopkins’ method consists in placing four volumes of concentrated glycerine in a tube, 
covering this with a layer of one volume of a mixture of 90 per cent alcohol (nine parts) 
and ether (one part), transferring the larvae from 90 per cent alcohol to the tube and 
allowing them to remain until the alcohol and ether have evaporated. However, by making 
a small opening in the body wall larvae can be mounted in glycerine jelly without much 
difficulty. 
A number of methods for mounting larvae have been described. A simple and rapid 
method is given by Gater (1929). For mounting fluid Gater uses a medium consisting of 
water 10; picked gum arabic 8; chloral hydrate 74; glucose syrup 5; and glacial acetic 3, 
dissolved in the order given, preferably on a water bath at about 50” C. and afterwards 
filtered through Whatman’s paper No. 5 by Buchner’s funnel and suction pump. Small 
quantities can be cleared by centrifuging. The glucose syrup is made by dissolving 98 g. of 
bacteriological glucose in 100 C.C. water. Larvae are freed from water and mounted 
direct. The medium is also very useful for mounting small objects generally from water. 
Puri (193 1) found Gater’s medium the most satisfactory for mounting whole larvae. 
De Faure’s chloral gum (Imms, 1929) was not satisfactory for mounting whole larvae, but 
gave good results with skins. King (19 13-14) found a medium made by dissolving small 
lumps of pale colophonium in rectified oil of turpentine better than xylol balsam. For 
killing and clearing he used equal parts pure carbolic crystals and absolute alcohol. After 
15-30 minutes larvae were ready for mounting in the colophonium medium after removing 
excess of fluid. Buckner (1934) places larvae for 15-20 minutes in 1.5 per cent MgS04 
solution to clear them of foreign matter and kills with cocaine hydrochloride (2 per cent 
for 4 hours). Wanamaker (1944) found creosote substituted for xylene a better canada 
balsam medium. Canada balsam was heated slowly to drive off all xylene and thinned 
with creosote. 
A medium for mounting larvae that has given good results with the author is described 
by Bhatia (1948). 50 g. crystalline pure resin is dissolved in 75 C.C. oleum eucalypti at room 
temperature. Allow to stand and decant. Kill larvae in hot water and bring to 90-95 per 
cent alcohol or kill in alcohol. Transfer to 95 per cent or absolute alcohol, puncture the 
thorax, remove excess of alcohol and mount in the medium. The larvae become trans- 
parent in about half an hour. In 2-3 days the medium sets hard and does not require 
116 
MANIPULATION OF LARVAE AND PUPAE 
ringing. Its refractive index (1.497) is less than that of balsam (1.524) and so shows up 
hairs better. 
For the final mounting some form of cell or support for the cover-glass is necessary. 
For the small first and second instar larvae strips of broken cover-glass are suitable. For 
larger larvae strips of bristol board on each side of the object, or if thicker material is 
required, strips of glass slide cut by glazier’s diamond. It is usually necessary with the 
thicker mounts to add more mounting medium until fluid under the cover-glass ceases to 
shrink. 
One difficulty in mounting is due to the siphon not being in line with the body. For many 
purposes it is sufficient to cut the larva into two at about the middle of the abdomen, 
mounting the head half on the flat and the tail half on its side. 
Mounting larval skins. Many external structural features are specially well displayed in 
the cast skin. These, when first cast, are much wrinkled and after a time become unduly 
loose and elongated. By choosing a skin at the right amount of relaxation it can be floated 
on a slide with the parts in fair position. Such skins can be mounted in chloral gum, Gater 
or Bhatia medium and are especially valuable for the clear display given of the larval hairs, 
but also of some other parts, for example the pharynx, and, with a little dissection, mouth- 
parts, siphon structures, etc. For systematic purposes Puri (193 I), for Anopheles larvae, 
makes preparations of specially displayed skins as follows. Skins are treated in 10 per cent 
KOH for an hour, washed in three changes of water and under the binocular on a slide are 
cut along the mid ventral line by niggling with needles. They are afterwards passed through 
alcohols to 70 per cent and spread on a slide. When satisfactorily spread they are flooded 
with 90 per cent alcohol, which causes them to become flattened and stiff and adherent to 
the slide. They can then be mounted as they are, or detached and treated as sections. 
Fixing larvae and pupae. For general purposes the most satisfactory fixative for larvae and 
pupae is Bles’s fluid (formalin 7; glacial acetic 3 ; 70 per cent alcohol 90). This was also 
found by Puri very suitable for Anopheles larvae. The fixative penetrates readily and 
except for some special purpose it is unnecessary to puncture larvae. 
For fixing at different hours of culture and as a general fixative the rapid method of 
killing and fixing used by Tower (1902), in studying ecdysial fluid, is very satisfactory. 
Larvae at the desired stage are killed by momentary immersion in sat. solution of HgC& 
in 35 per cent alcohol 70 parts, acetic acid 30 parts heated to 60-65” C. They are then 
transferred to sat. solution HgCl, in 35 per cent alcohol 99 parts, acetic acid 1 part, for 
from 1 to 6 hours according to size. Later they are dealt with in the usual way for sublimate 
fixed material. 
, In dealing with fixed material it is often convenient to turn out a number of larvae to 
select material for sectioning or other purposes. A useful piece of apparatus in returning 
such material to its tube is a perforated lifter made from a piece of perforated zinc or other 
metal about 2i by 1 cm. set in a slit in a wooden handle. This cannot be used with Bles or 
other acid fluids, but a strip of bristol board may be helpful. 
Slicing technique in study of structure. Whilst for the study of internal structure serial 
sectioning is essential (see later subsection in this chapter), very useful subsidiary help may 
be given by suitable bisecting or slicing of fixed larvae or pupae. For this a suitably fixed 
larva or pupa should be placed in a suitable position on a slab of paraffin under a low power 
117 
TECHNIQUE 
microscope. When in correct position, this is then cut down upon by a sharp razor. The 
larva or pupa may be bisected in a vertical or horizontal plane or in any way which it 
is thought will enable particular structures to be displayed. To prevent the object shifting 
during the process it may be fixed in position by a fine entomological pin driven through 
it into the paraffin in such a way as not to interfere with the cutting. 
Instead of a razor, Pantin (1946) uses a fragment of blue Gillette razor blade so broken 
off with pliers as to give a length of cutting edge and a projecting portion by which the 
fragment can be set in a slit wooden handle. It is essential that it should be firmly held, 
which can be achieved by sealing the knife in position with sealing wax. In use it can often 
be steadied by contacting the free end of the blade with a finger of the left hand. 
In the two halves of a bisected larva, including the bisected head, the various structures 
are often marvellously shown. It is usually desirable to lift out with a touch or two of the 
needle the loosely held alimentary canal in order to display better other structures. 
Larvae, fixed and bisected or sliced, form excellent material for the study of larval muscu- 
lature viewed under polarised light (see under muscular system). 
A useful technique for studying certain structures is given by Wigglesworth (1942). The 
larva is slit along the side with scissors and the gut removed through the slit. The body may 
then be unrolled and mounted flat, all tissues, germinal buds, heart, etc. being displayed. 
Another useful method for certain purposes is to select a larva that has just ecdysed and 
has a completely transparent head. By staining in picro-carmine or other suitable stain 
and clearing, the brain and other nervous structures are especially clearly shown, the 
nerves going to the antennae, optic lobes and other cephalic structures especially being 
shown up in their proper relations with great clearness. For dissection of salivary glands 
a in larvae and pupae, see Jenson (1955). 
MANIPULATION OF PUPAE 
When collecting pupae from a culture with the intention of separating the sexes it is 
convenient to place the culture dish facing a window and to tilt this somewhat towards 
the observer. If rearing is being done on any scale, it is useful to have a graduated wooden 
support for this purpose (Fig. 2 (3~)). The pupae then arise free from the glass sides of the 
dish and can more conveniently be pipetted out as they do so, diagnosis of sex being made 
at the same time. If the culture is optimal, the difference in size and appearance of the two 
sexes is so great that any mistake can scarcely be made. With poor cultivation the difference 
is less marked and with starved forms may almost, but never quite, disappear. 
If collecting pupae in mass for bulk breeding out or other purpose, the small sieve 
described in the subsection on apparatus will be found very useful. By holding this in one 
hand with the netting submerged and pipetting in the pupae, even a large culture can be 
cleared in a few minutes without damage to the insects and without including still unchanged 
larvae with the pupae. By including larvae when pupae are put up for emergence the nice 
clean-cut technique where a dish is left with just the number of skins of mosquitoes in the 
emergence cage no longer holds, nor can freedom from the other sex be assured. 
Use of the sieve also simplifies the final putting up of the collected pupae in clean water, 
since no material amount of culture medium with suspended matter is carried over. If 
much culture fluid is present in the dishes there is considerable danger that in the 48 hours 
or so at 28” C. scum may form with mortality. 
Pupae fix well in Bless fluid, but in this as in other lethal fluids the time taken for 
118 
MANIPULATION OF LARVAE AND PUPA 
killing may be considerable. As noted later also pupae do not readily bleach. 
to an outer oily layer which is removed after momentary dipping in chloroform, 
then allow ready penetration and will bleach readily. 
(g) MANIPULATION OF ADULTS This is due 
Pupae will 
Collecting and transferring. Methods of manipulating small numbers of mosquitoes are 
given by Stephens and Christophers (1908). 
Single mosquitoes can be collected in nature or from cages in test tubes or 3 by 1 in. 
specimen tubes closed by wool plugs or collected by a suction pipette and transferred to 
tubes by manipulating the wool plugs. They can be transferred from such tubes to a 
prepared jar by covering the mouth of the jar with a piece of cardboard in which a hole 
has been cut plugged with wool and inserting the mouth of the tube into this. The mosquito 
usually flies in without difficulty. If not, it can be propelled in by moving the tube up and 
down. Yolles and Knigin (1943) use a slit in a rubber diaphragm through which the tube 
is thrust. 
Mosquitoes bred out in a jar may be collected as follows: place over the mouth of the 
jar an empty jar and, drawing out the netting covering the breeding jar, allow as many 
mosquitoes as will do so to fly up. Now insert two pieces of cardboard between the jars 
and separate these each with a piece of cardboard closing it. Replace the pieces of card- 
board with netting. 
If the mosquitoes are to be killed at once for mounting, etc., replace the cardboard or 
netting with a piece of cardboard with a hole and wool plug. The mosquitoes can now be 
killed by dropping a suitable amount of chloroform on the wool plug. 
If the mosquitoes so collected are to be kept alive, the jar into which they have been taken 
should be previously prepared by inserting a piece of cardboard to give foothold (Fig. 2 (7)). 
Or a ‘mosquito hotel’ can be made ready for them. For this a wide-mouth bottle with a 
flat hollow stopper, as is usually available in the laboratory (Fig. 2 (7)) is very convenient. 
The stopper is filled with water on which is floated a small piece of cork shaving and on this 
a small piece of paper. Mosquitoes can be fed through netting onto which the bottle can 
be lifted without danger of any escapes. Such an arrangement is a very useful one on 
occasions, for example to obtain eggs from a captured female of a rare species. In place of 
the apparatus as described the jar covered with netting can be stood so that it rests with 
part of the opening immersed in water in a dish: or a small globe-shaped lampshade can be 
used. Or alternatively a small cage can be used with a meat dish of water and a filter paper 
fan. 
Ordinarily single specimens of ALides aegypti are put up for observation, for example on 
time of digestion, oviposition, number of eggs laid, etc., in 3 by 1 in. specimen tubes with 
a little water in the bottom and a strip of filter paper, which should touch the water and 
lie against the side of the tube. A piece of netting fastened over the opening by a small 
rubber band is much to be preferred to a wool plug for such tubes, as wool plugs in the 
course of days are apt to get displaced, with loss of the specimen, and also give less venti- 
lation. Usually the mosquito, if netting is used, rests on the netting (see also Gillett, 1955). 
When dealing with mosquitoes in bulk as referred to in the subsection on apparatus 
these are transferred as described by having cages equipped with sliding door, sleeve, etc., 
and adopting the procedure as described. 
TECHNIQUE 
Mounting mosquitoes for systematic purposes. For mounting, mosquitoes are best killed by 
chloroform. Only just sufficient should be used to ensure death as excess stiffens and 
distorts the insects. When turned out on to a sheet of paper they should lie flaccid with 
legs and wings extended. The best pins to use are the small stainless steel pins now avail- 
able for the purpose. The insect should be turned on its back and the pin introduced in 
the mid-point between the origin of the legs. It should be pushed in only enough just to 
touch the dorsum, but not to project. Mosquitoes of the subgenus Stegomyia are of an 
awkward shape to pin in this way. Pinning from the side, however, damages important 
structures of the pleura. In default, mosquitoes can be sent unpinned. In this case a little 
crumpled tissue paper is to be preferred to wool. 
After transfixing with a pin some method of mounting is necessary. Some of the older 
methods are unnecessarily elaborate. For a single specimen a narrow strip of cork sheet, 
say + by $ in. or less through one end of which an ordinary pin, or better a no. 16 entomo- 
logical pin has been passed is suitable as it will take the blunt end of the stainless steel pin 
satisfactorily and gives a firm support. For museum specimens a small piece of cellulojd 
sheet may be substituted for the cork. It is usually necessary to puncture this first with a 
fine needle to take the pin (Fig. 2 @A)). 
For putting up specimens in the tropics for transmission by post, etc., see Christophers, 
Sinton and Cove11 (1941). Single mounted mosquitoes put up in numbers in a box are 
extremely liable to be damaged in transit. Another danger is mould which is liable to 
attack any specimen hermetically sealed up. A method which has served well is the use of 
3 by 1 in. specimen tubes with certain precautions. A wedge should be cut out of the cork 
and the opening so made plugged with wool. As an extra precaution, specimens put up in 
the tubes after such procedure can be well dried in a desiccator. For a single mosquito all 
that is necessary is to stick this mounted as above firmly in the cork of the tube. The tube 
is then wrapped in a small square of wool, a number of such tubes being again enclosed in 
a suitable box when despatched (Fig. 2 (8~)). 
If numbers of mosquitoes have to be dealt with they can be mounted on a cork strip set 
in a 3 by 1 in. specimen tube. A strip of cork sheet, say 24 by 3 in. is firmly pinned towards 
one side of the inner face of the cork. Mosquitoes impaled on the small steel pins are now 
set along the cork strip in a single or double row. Up to twenty specimens can usually be 
put in a tube in this way (Fig. 2 (8c, D)). 
Observations on adults. For mass observations, such as percentage fed, the average weight 
for a culture and other bionomical data, the adults in the experimental cage, after being 
killed in the killing-chamber, are turned out, counted and classified. Where weight is 
required a sufficient number of the required specification, that is males or females, gorged 
females, etc., are collected in small stoppered weighing bottles and weighed on the chemical 
balance. Or single mosquitoes can be weighed on a torsion balance. 
For the latter purpose a fine stainless steel pin, as used for mounting, is bent into a hook 
to hang on the torsion arm. With this the mosquito is impaled through the tip of the 
abdomen or a wing, allowance being made for the weight of the pin. Considerable numbers 
can be weighed in this way without undue trouble and the mean taken. 
For measurement of wing length the insects should be allowed to dry, as the wing is 
then readily detached, whilst in the undried insect to detach the wing is often difficult. 
For mounting, wings should be dropped first into a watch-glass with xylene, then pipetted 
120 
MANIPULATION OF ADULTS 
out on to a slide and a drop of thin balsam added whilst the xylene is still in excess. This 
prevents the formation of a very troublesome air bubble which is very apt to form in the 
hollow of the wing. There is also less danger of scales being detached than if wings are 
mounted direct into balsam. 
Feeding mosquitoes. Mosquitoes in bulk can be fed in experiments or for oviposition on 
the human arm or on an animal. If observations on the number biting are important some 
device is desirable to restrict the accessible area to what can be clearly seen. Use of a 
glove and some other precautions are also useful; see Christophers (1947). The most suit- 
able animal would appear to be the rabbit which gives good feeds and a good egg supply; 
see under ‘ Apparatus ‘, p. 107. 
For feeding in connection with bird malaria and feeding through a membrane, see Bishop 
and Gilchrist (1946). For artificial feeding by capillary pipette, see Hertig and Hertig 
(1927) ; Patton and Hindle (1927) ; Kadletz and Kusmina (1929) ; MacGregor (1930). 
Artificial feeding is, however, less satisfactory than normal feeding (see p. 490). For 
technique in virus diseases see Dunn (1932), Davis (1940) Merril and Ten Broek (1940) and 
Waddell (1945). 
A simple method of experimental feeding of single mosquitoes with any desired fluid is 
described by Mattingly (1946). The mosquitoes to be fed are allowed to emerge from the 
pupa in ordinary agglutination tubes (which are just about the width to prevent free flight) 
closed by a plug of cotton wool or gauze through which the water is poured off after 
emergence. The food is administered on the end of a half-inch long feeding tube cut from 
glass tubing that will easily slide into the agglutination tube. A small circle of linen gauze 
is pushed down the inside of the feeding tube to project at the end. Food is dropped on the 
projecting gauze from a pipette and the tube pushed down towards the mosquito. Kligler 
(1928) makes use of light to cause the mosquito to fly to the netting. When on the netting 
the desired fluid is brought into contact with this. Russell (1931) uses a netting cylinder 
smeared with mango juice to attract the mosquitoes, but not enough for them to feed. 
This is followed by a mixture of the blood and normal saline, 10 drops to the C.C. 
Dissection. For dissection of the mid-gut and salivary glands needles should be fairly 
stout; or, if fine, mounted short to ensure rigidity. For finer dissections the fine steel pins 
used for mounting fixed in match sticks and sharpened on a hone work very well. Russell 
(193 1) finds dental instruments, for example nerve canal probes, useful. 
For dissection of the gut, the mosquito, after removal of the legs and wings, is placed on 
its left side with the abdomen pointing to the observer. With a needle held in the left hand 
transfix the thorax and, holding the mosquito ventral side uppermost, bring the apex of 
the abdomen to a small drop of saline. Nick the chitin of the abdomen on each side to 
separate partially the last two segments, and placing the needle point held with the right 
hand flatly on the partially separated segments, exert gentle traction drawing the separated 
segments away with the viscera attached. If, as the viscera are drawn out, the gut threatens 
to break, prod the thorax once or twice with the needle and try again. In a successful dis- 
section the alimentary canal from the proventriculus backwards should be drawn out 
together with the diverticula (Fig. 63 (1)). 
To examine the mid-gut for oocysts, cut through the intestine and Malpighian tubules 
just beyond the pylorus and remove these, as also any fat-body, etc. Cover, using an 
excess of fluid. Now remove this with filter paper, allowing the mid-gut to become flattened. 
121 
TECHNIQUE 
When satisfactorily flattened the pattern of muscles fibres should show up. Examine under 
the oil immersion. Dissection and staining of the mid-gut is dealt with by Seidelin and 
Summers-Connal (19 14). 
When a dissection is made in this way the ovaries, spermathecae and rectum remain 
attached to the terminal segments and if required can be dissected out. If the ovaries are 
undeveloped or only partially enlarged, they offer no difficulty and can be readily seen and 
isolated. If the female is fully gravid, however, only careful dissection enables them to be 
withdrawn intact. For a physiological saline for A. aegypti, see Hayes (1953). 
For dissection of the salivary glands the neatest and simplest method depends upon the 
fact that under slight pressure on the thorax these can be made to bulge at the neck. After 
removal of the legs and wings, place the mosquito in a drop of saline on its right side with 
the proboscis towards the observer. Now place the shaft of the left-hand needle towards 
its point across the thorax and exert gentle pressure, so that the soft parts at the base of 
the neck are seen to bulge. Now place the shaft of the other needle towards the point 
behind the head and drag this steadily away from the body, keeping the needle in position 
when the head leaves the body and simultaneously cutting down to sever the small tag of 
tissue that has come away attached to the head. In this tag should be the glands, all six of 
which may be seen as refractive bodies. If not to be seen in the tag, press a little more with the 
left-hand needle to squeeze out a little more tissue and detach this. For further details, see 
Christophers et al. Or in a method used by Shute (1940) the head is cut off to start with and 
the tissues at the base of the neck expressed (see Barber and Rice, 1936; Hunter et al. 1946). 
For detection of sporozoites the glands should be crushed under the cover-glass, as 
otherwise these bodies, even if present, may not be seen still lying in the gland. The glands 
in A. aegypti are very small and quite different to the voluminous structures in Anopheles. 
Methods of preparing the material for dissection and study of the mouth-parts, hypo- 
pygium and various organs and tissues will be found in the sections dealing with external 
and internal structure. 
(h) SECTIONING 
Histological technique might not be considered a subject which came within the scope of 
the present work. But the cutting of good sections is so important in connection with the 
study of mosquitoes and especially of one like AFdes aegypti so much concerned with 
disease that some latitude may be allowed. This is especially so since sectioning the mosquito 
is a rather special technique of which little will be found in the usual text-books, so that 
some brief description of embedding in this case may be useful. 
Mosquitoes are most satisfactorily sectioned by double embedding in celloidin and 
paraffin, using the Peterfi methyl benzoate method (see Pantin, 1946). This method is 
quicker and simpler than the original oil of cloves and celloidin method. In only one 
respect is it less satisfactory, namely, as usually described, for orientation as described later. 
However, by transferring the specimen from the thin celloidin to a final thick syrup, which 
is quite easy to make, this disadvantage is done away with. The most satisfactory celloidin 
is celloidin wool obtained from Gurr. The thick syrup referred to should be about the con- 
sistency of golden syrup. The method is as follows: 
The Peterfi methyl benzoate method. The material after dehydration (preferably with a final 
change to copper-sulphated absolute alcohol) is transferred to 1-O per cent solution of 
122 
SECTIONING 
celloidin in methyl benzoate. Or a useful way is to place a layer of alcohol above methyl 
benzoate in a small tube and allow the specimen to remain until it has sunk into the latter 
and has become transparent. When transparent the specimen is transferred for 30 minutes 
to a thick syrup of celloidin in methyl benzoate and then placed in a drop of the syrup on 
a paraffined cover-slip placed in the bottom of a small glass pot or watch-glass under the 
dissecting microscope for orientation as described in the next subsection. When oriented, 
benzene is pipetted carefully into the pot so that it rises gradually over the cover-glass and 
specimen solidifying this as it does so. By proceeding in this way there is no displacement 
of the orientation as there is apt to be using the inverted cover-glass dropped on the fluid. ’ 
When the tablet finally detaches itself it is transferred to benzene, with at least one change 
to remove all trace of the methyl benzoate which is not very soluble in paraffin. The tablet 
is now ready for embedding. 
Orienting for sectioning. Much of the success of satisfactory sectioning depends upon 
perfect orientation. To the drop of celloidin syrup in which the object is now lying under 
the microscope a suitable length of a fairly thick hair should be added and arranged 
parallel to the specimen. The hair should preferably be thick and dark so as to be easily 
seen by transmitted light in the final paraffin block. The hairs from a black varnish brush 
serve very well. Further to assist in arranging the block for cutting, the anterior end of the 
specimen should be indicated. This can be done when the tablet is being finally blocked as 
described below and when the object is still visible in the solidifying wax. One way is to 
draw out a point on the edge of the wax as it solidifies. Another is to insert a small paper 
wedge and still another is to touch the edge of the wax with a grease pencil. Where accurate 
orientation is desired it is important that the hair should not only give the line of direction 
of the object but be as far as possible lying in the same plane, or, what gives a very good 
indication, two lengths of hair, one on each side of the object and in the same plane as this, 
can be used. 
To embed. In the method described above the specimen, duly oriented and passed through 
two changes of benzene, will be enclosed in a more or less tablet-like portion of transparent 
celloidin jelly This is now transferred to the top of the paraffin bath with enough benzene 
to cover it and shavings of paraffin of the selected melting point added until an approach 
to pure paraffin is reached when it is transferred to paraffin, after which it can be blocked. 
Smear a watch-glass with glycerine (or better melted glycerine jelly). Place the watch- 
glass on wet filter paper on a slab. Pipette in sufficient melted paraffin to form when cold 
a suitably sized button. Whilst this is still fluid add the specimen, removing it from the 
embedding bath with a heated small doll’s spoon or wide-mouthed pipette. Whilst the top 
of the button is still fluid pipette in some more paraffin to make a second button over the 
first, stopping short before it overflows. Now lower the watch-glass into a basin of cold 
water, tilting it as it is lowered and blowing upon it at the same time, and at such a rate and 
tilt that the fluid paraffin does not break through the congealed surface. When fully sub- 
merged let it fall to the bottom. When the paraffin floats free scratch on it some identifying 
number. Later, when putting aside for sectioning, a printed serially numbered slip can be 
melted on to the block with a hot metal holder. 
To cut. It is usually possible to locate by transmitted light the position of the object and 
guiding hair. Roughly trim the block as desired. Now fix it on the holder of the micro- 
123 
TECHNIQUE 
tome and cut the upper and lower surfaces so that when the block is being cut the top and 
bottom edge of the sections will be strictly parallel and the ribbon be straight.* Dip the 
block momentarily into overheated soft paraffin (about 49” C. melting point is usually 
satisfactory for making sections adhere), or, using soft paraffin very hot (75-80” C.), smear 
both upper and lower surfaces, using a small brush. Trim the block at the sides to an 
appropriate width, making one side oblique so that this will give a useful indication later 
as to which side of the ribbon may be uppermost. This will prevent some sections being 
mounted upside down. If the ribbon tends to break, the soft paraffin may be too soft or 
too hard, or not applied hot enough, so that it is not incorporated with the underlying hard 
paraffin. Or there may be a crack (if the celloidin syrup was too thick) where the paraffin 
meets the celloidin. If the ribbon comes off to one side, the faces of the block may not have 
been parallel, or not set parallel to the knife’s edge, or the whole block set at a slant so 
that the surfaces, though parallel, do not cut so. When trimming, the guide hairs can 
usually be cut off. 
To set out sections. Clean slides in sulphuric acid and potassium bichromate. Wash without 
handling, using old forceps dipped in the acid. Keep the slides in absolute alcohol until 
used. Wipe clean immediately before use with a single sweep of a freshly laundered hand- 
kerchief. Success largely depends upon the slides being truly grease-free. Mix a camel-hair 
brushfull of Mayer’s glycerine-albumen with about 5 ml. distilled water in a small glass 
pot. Mark off on the slide with a grease pencil about the limits of the cover-glass to be 
used. This may help later in case any doubt arises as to which side of the slide the sections 
are on. With sweeps of the camel-hair brush cover between the marks with an even layer 
of the diluted fixative. If properly grease-free this should lie as it is placed. Transfer 
suitable lengths of ribbon cut off with a sharp scalpel to the slide, allowing for some 
lengthening when these are flattened. Place the slide on a plate just hot enough not to 
melt the paraffin and allow the sections to flatten out. A very convenient hot-plate for this 
purpose, and some other uses, is a thickish sheet of copper about 8 by 5 in. laid on the floor 
of the recess near the bottom of the usual type of embedding bath. It should project about 
2 in. When fully flattened, drain off excess of fluid and, after allowing the slide to cool, 
blot firmly with smooth white filter paper. A trace of diacetin in the diluted fixative may 
be used to give increased flattening and adhesion (Abul-Nasr, 1950). 
Label on the opposite side to the sections at one end of the slide using a writing diamond. 
If this is done on the same side it is apt to become covered with balsam and invisible. 
When completed, place the slides to dry, preferably in a slotted trough in a desiccator in 
the incubator. 
To stain and mount. A good stain for general purposes is Ehrlich’s haematoxylin-picric- 
eosin. This gives many distinguishing gradations in colour, depending on the tissue and 
strongly stained nuclei. When slides are thoroughly dry, remove one at a time from the 
desiccator to the hot-plate, and when the paraffin is just not melted run over the sections in 
succession from drop bottles: xylol (xylene), carbol-xylol (melted phenol crystals 1, 
xylol 4) and copper-sulphated absolute alcohol. Transfer to a glass pot of 90 per cent 
alcohol. Apart from ensuring certain clearing, the carbol-xylol is largely responsible for 
complete removal of the celloidin which otherwise stains. Pass through alcohols to 30 per 
* Some microtomes have an attachment for doing this, or it is worth while making some small device oneself to 
do this automatically. The narrower the block is made from above down the more sections per row r can be mounted. 
124 
SECTIONING 
cent and flood with Ehrlich’s acid haematoxylin. Stain 30-60 minutes. Sections should at 
this stage be strongly overstained, as they are later decolorised by the picric acid. Wash off 
the stain with 30 per cent alcohol and pass through alcohols to 90 per cent. Flood for some 
seconds with saturated solution of picric acid in 90 per cent alcohol. Wash out excess of 
picric with 90 per cent alcohol and flood with eosin (watery) l-2000 in 90 per cent alcohol. 
Wash quickly in 90 per cent alcohol and treat briefly in succession with absolute alcohol, 
carbol-xylol and xylol, finally mounting in balsam. Success depends on getting the best 
effects with the three reagents. (See Addenda, p. 718.) 
For further information on histological procedure see Bolles Lee (1950); Carleton and 
Leach (1938) ; Baker (1950) ; Pantin (1946). The last-mentioned author gives a particularly 
clear account of methods suitable for the zoologist including orientation. For methods of 
orienting small objects see also Patten (1894) ; Drew (1900). For an alternative method of 
fixing sections on the slide see Haupt (1930), and for the diacetin method, Abul-Nasr 
(1950). 
Fixing and sectioning of eggs. For fixing and sectioning eggs of insects see Nelson (19 15) ; 
Gambrel1 (1933); Butt (1934). Fixation usually requires puncture of the egg and use of a 
strong fixative, for example Carnoy’s fluid. For fixing mosquito eggs best results have been 
obtained by slicing off the posterior extremity or anterior end, depending on the part to 
be studied. Later stages are reasonably penetrable. When fixed, cutting is not difficult if 
care be given to good orientation. 
For methods of cutting highly refractory material see Slifer ‘and King (1933) ; also 
Tahmisian and Slifer (1942). Slifer and King fix in Carnoy-Lebrun’s fluid, wash with 
iodised alcohol, cut the egg in half (grasshopper egg), soak 24 hours in 4 per cent phenol 
in 80 per cent alcohol, dehydrate and pass through carbon-xylol to paraffin. Before 
cutting, the block is trimmed just to expose the yolk and soaked for 24 hours in water. 
Tahmisian and Slifer fix in Bouin’s fluid, transfer without washing to 100 per cent dioxan 
for 8 hours with one change, then to paraffin with 0.5 beeswax for 8 hours with two changes. 
After embedding, the block is cut to expose the yolk and soaked 24 hours in water. 
Eggs and small first instar larvae, etc., can be oriented in rows on small slabs of hardened 
liver by dropping glycerine-albumen on to them when lying on the slab in 90 per cent 
alcohol. Without some such method the cutting of small objects such as mosquito eggs is 
not very satisfactory. 
Help may be obtained by softening the brittle egg-shell by use of diaphanol. 
Reconstruction. For methods of making reconstructional drawings or models see Norman 
(1923); Wilson (1933); Pusey (1939); Pantin (1946). 
Drawings. For suggestions for preparing drawings for reproduction see Cannon (1936). 
Histochemical studies. For technique in histochemical studies see Lison (1936). 
(i) OTHER SPECIAL TECHNIQUES 
For methods of ensuring desired degrees of humidity see Buxton (1931); Lewis (1933); 
Buxton and Mellanby (1934); C. G. Johnson (1940); Seaton and Lumsden (1941); 
Lumsden (1947) ; Bertram and Gordon (1939). For psychromatic tables of vapour 
pressure, relative humidity and the dew-point see Marvin (1941). For specific gravity 
125 
TECHNIQUE 
determination by the falling-drop method see Barbour and Hamilton (1926). For methods 
of determining dissolved oxygen see Senior-White (1926) ; Iyengar (1930) ; Theriault (1925) ; 
U.S.A. Publ. Hlth Ass. (1920). For method of measuring angle of contact see Beament 
(1945). For measurement of light intensity see Muirhead-Thomson (1940). For measure- 
ment of pH of microscopic objects see Pantin (1923). For use of radio-isotopes see Bugher 
and Taylor (1949) ; Brues and Sacher (1952) ; Terzian (1953); Jenkins (1954) ; Scott and 
Peng (1957). For use of chromatography with mosquitoes see Micks (1954). For other 
special methods connected with the study of mosquito biology see under respective 
subsections. (See also Addenda, p. 718.) 
REFERENCES 
(a-g) REARING AND MANIPULATION 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). See references to chapter VI, p. 155. 
BARBER, M. A. and RICE, J. B. (1936). Methods of dissecting and making permanent preparations 
of salivary glands and stomachs of Anopheles. Amer. J. Hyg. 24, 32-40. 
BARNETT, H. C. (1955). Cage equipment for the study of mosquitoes infected with pathogenic 
agents. Mosquito News, 15, 43-4. 
BATES, M. (1949). The natural history of mosquitoes. Macmillan and Co., New York. 
BHATIA, M. L. (1948). A simple medium for mounting mosquito larvae. Zndian J. Malar. 2, 
283-4. 
BISHOP, A. and GILCHRIST, B. M. (1946). Experiments upon the feeding of Aedes aegypti through 
animal membranes, etc. Parasitology, 37, 85-100. 
BLANC, G. and CAMINOPETROS, J. (1929). Quelques mots sur le mode de conservation des 
Stegomyies en cage. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 22, 440-4. 
BOISSEZON, P. DE. See DE BOISSEZON, P. 
BUCKNER, J. F. (1934). An improved method for mounting mosquito larvae. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 
14, 489-91. 
BURCHFIELD, H. P., REDDER, A. M., STORRS, E. E. and HILCHEY, J. D. (1954). Improved methods 
for rearing larvae of Ai;des aegypti (L.) for use in insecticide bio-assay. Contr. Boyce 
Thompson Inst. 17, 3 17-3 1. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1928). An aspirator for catching midges. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 22, 
179-80. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1925). Race suicide in Stegomyia. Bull. Ent. Res. 16, 
151-3. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1927). Researches in Polynesia and Melanesia. Parts 
I-IV. Mem. London Sch. of Hyg. and Trop. Med. no. 1. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg. Camb. 45, 176-231. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R., SINTON, J. A. and COVELL, G. (1941). How to do a malaria survey. Govt. 
Zndia Hlth Bull. no. 14. Ed. 4. Delhi. 
DAVID, W. A. L., BRACEY, P. and HARVEY, A. (1944). Equipment and method employed in 
breeding Ai;des aegypti for the biological assay of insecticides. Bull. Ent. Res. 35, 227-30. 
DAVIS, W. A. (1940). A study of birds and mosquitoes as hosts for the virus of eastern equine 
encephalomyelytis. Amer. J. Hyg. 32, 45-59. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1933). De l’utilisation des proteins et du fer d’origin vegetale dans la matura- 
tion des oeufs, chez Culex pipiens. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 114, 487-9. 
DUNN, L. H. (1932). A simple method of immobilising animals for laboratory purposes. Amer. J. 
Trop. Med. 12, 173-8. 
FIELDING, J. W. (1919). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata Fabr. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 13, 259-96. 
GATER, B. A. R. (1929). An improved method of mounting mosquito larvae. Bull. Ent. Res. 19, 
367-8. 
126 
REFERENCES 
GERBERICH, J. B. (1945). Quieting mosquito larvae. J. Econ. Em. 38, 393-4. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955). Mosquito handling-a recent development in technique for handling 
pupae of A. aegypti. Rep. Virus Res. Inst. E. Afr. High Comm. 19545, p. 24. 
HAYES, R. 0. (1953). Determination of a physiological saline solution for Ai;des aegypti. J. Econ. 
Ent. 46, 624-7. 
HERTIG, A. T. and HERTIG, M. (1927). A technique for artificial feeding of sandflies and mosquitoes. 
Science, 65, 328-9. 
HINDLE, E. (1929). The experimental study of yellow fever. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 22, 
405-30. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1930). A study of the food of mosquito larvae (Culicidae). Amer. J. Hyg. 12, 
238-70. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1932). The role of solutes and colloids in the nutrition of mosquito larvae. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 12, 263-71. 
HUNTER, W. III, WELLER, T. H. and JAHNES, W. G. (1946). An outline for teaching mosquito 
stomach and salivary gland dissection. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 26, 221-7. 
IMMS, A. D. (1929). Some methods of technique applicable to entomology. Bull. Ent. Res. 20, 165. 
JAMES, S. P. (1923). Eggs of Finlaya geniculata and of other English mosquitoes illuminated with 
the aid of Lieberkuhn reflector. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 17, 8-9. 
JENSEN, D. V. (1955). Method for dissecting salivary glands in mosquito larvae and pupae. 
Mosquito News, 15, 215-16. 
JOHNSON, H. A. (1937). Note on the continuous rearing of Aedes aegypti in the laboratory. Publ. 
Hlth Rep. Wash. 52, 1177-9. 
KADLETZ, N. A. and KUSMINA, L. A. (1929). Experimentelle Studien ueber den Saugprozess bei 
Anopheles mittels einer zwangsweisen Methode. Arch. Schz&s.- u. Tropenhyg. 33, 335-50. 
KING, W. V. (1913-14). Note on the mounting of mosquito larvae. Amer. J. Trop. Dis. 1, 403. 
KLIGLER, I. J. (1928). Simple method of feeding Stegomyia on blood or mixtures containing 
culture. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 21, 329-31. 
KNEIRIM, J. A., LEA, A. O., DIMOND, J. B. and DELONG, D. M. (1955). Feeding adult mosquitoes 
on preserved blood to maintain egg production. Mosquito News, 15, 176-9. 
LANG, C. A. and WALLIS, R. C. (1956). An artificial feeding procedure for AEdes aegypti L. using 
sucrose as a stimulant. Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 5, 915-20. 
LEESON, H. S. (1932). Method of rearing and maintaining large stocks of fleas and mosquitoes 
for experimental purposes. Bull. Ent. Res. 23, 25-31. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1947). Observations on the effect of microclimate on the biting of Ak;des 
aegypti (L.) (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Exp. Biol. 24, 361-73. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1915). Notes on the rearing of Stegomyia fasciata in London. J. Trop. Med. 
(Hyg.), 18, 193-6. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1929). The significance of pH in the development of mosquito larvae. 
Parasitology, 21, 132-57. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1930). The artificial feeding of mosquitoes by a new method which demon- 
strates certain functions of the diverticula. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 23, 329-31. 
MARTINI, E. (1921). Ueber Stechmiicken und Kriebelmiickenzucht. Arch. Schifi.- u. Tropenhyg. 
25, 120-l. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1946). A technique for feeding adult mosquitoes. Nature, Lond., 158, 751. 
MERRIL, M. H. and TEN BROECK, C. (1940). The transmission of equine encephalitis virus by 
Aedes aegypti. J. Exp. Med. 62, 687-95. 
NIESCHULZ, 0. and Du TOIT, R. M. (1934). Handling mosquitoes for experimental purposes 
under South African conditions. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. 3, 79-95. 
PANTIN, C. F. A. (1946). Notes on Microscopical Technique for Zoologists. Cambridge Univ. Press. 
PATTON, W. S. and HINDLE, E. (1927). Artificial feeding of sandflies. Proc. R. Sot. B, 101, 369. 
PICK, F. (1950). L’inclusion temporaire des ceufs d’AL;des aegypti & l’aide de technique de silico- 
gel sur larve. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 43, 364-72. 
PURI, I. M. (1931). Larvae of Anopheline mosquitoes with full description of those of the Indian 
species. Indian Med. Res. Mem. no. 21. 
TECHNIQUE 
PUTNAM, P. and SHANNON, R. A. (1934). The biology of Stegomyia under laboratory conditions. 
2. Egg-laying capacity and longevity of adults. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 36, 217-42. 
Ross, R. W. (1956). A laboratory technique for studying the insect transmission of animal viruses 
employing a bat-wing membrane, demonstrated with two African viruses. J. Hyg., Camb., 54, 
192-200. 
RUSSELL, P. F. (1931). A method of feeding blood meals to mosquitoes-male and female. Amer. 
J. Trop. Med. II, 355-8. 
SEIDELIN, H. and SUMMERS-C• NNAL, S. (1914). A simple technique for the dissection and staining 
of mosquitoes. Yell. Fev. Bur. Bull. 3, 193-7. 
SELLARDS, A. W. (1932). Technical precautions employed in maintaining the virus of yellow fever 
in monkeys and mosquitoes. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 12, 79-92. 
SHANNON, R. C. (1939). Methods of collecting and feeding mosquitoes in jungle yellow fever 
studies. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 19, 13 l-8. 
SHANNON, R. C. and PUTNAM, P. (1934). The biology of Stegomyia under laboratory conditions. 
I. The analysis of factors which influence larval development. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 36, 
185-216. 
SHUTE, P. G. (1940). Supernumerary and bifurcated acini of the salivary glands of Anopheles 
maculipennis. Riv. di MaZarioZ. 19, Sez. 1, 16-19. 
SNIJDERS, E. P., DINGER, E. J. and SCHUFFNER, W. A. P. (1931). On the transmission of dengue 
in Sumatra. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 11, 171-97. 
STEPHENS, J. W. S. and CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1908). The Practical Study of Malaria. Ed. 3. 
Williams and Norgate, London. 
STOKES, A., BAUER, J. H. and HUDSON, N. P. (1928). Experimental transmission of yellow fever to 
Macacus rhesus. J. Amer. Med. Ass. 90, 253. 
TATE, P. and VINCENT, M. (1936). The biology of autogenous and anautogenous races of CuZex 
pipiens (Diptera : Culicidae). Parasitology, 28, 115-45. 
TOWER, W. L. (1902). Observations on the structure of the exuvial glands and the formation of 
the exuvial fluid in insects. ZooZ. Anz. 25, 466-72. 
TRAGER, W. (1935). On the nutritional requirements of mosquito larvae (Aedes aegypti). Amer. 
J. Hyg. 22, 475-93. 
TREMBLEY, H. L. (1944a). Mosquito culture technique. Mosquito News, 4, 103-19. 
TREMBLEY, H. L. (1944b). Some practical suggestions for the rearing of AFdes aegypti. Proc. 
N. J. Mosq. Ext. Ass. 31, 168-72. 
WADDELL, M. B. (1945). Persistence of yellow fever virus in mosquitoes after death of the insects. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 25, 329-32. 
WANAMAKER, J. F. (1944). An improved method for mounting mosquito larvae. Amer. J. Trop. 
Med. 24, 385-6. 
WEYER, F. (1934). Der Einfluss der Larvalernahrung auf die Fortpflanzungsphysiologie ver- 
schiedenen Stechmiicken. Arch. Schifi.- u. Tropenhyg. 38, 394-8. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The storage of protein, fat, glycogen and uric acid in the fat body 
and other tissues of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. BioZ. 19, 56-77. 
YOLLES, S. F. and KNIGIN, T. D. (1943). Note on a new transparent cage for collecting and 
feeding mosquitoes. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 23, 465-9. 
YOUNG, M. D. and BURGESS, R. W. (1946). Plastic cages for insects. Science, 104, 375. 
(h) SECTIONING 
ABUL-NASR, S. E. See references to chapter XIV (i), p. 354. 
BAKER, J. R. (1950). Cytological Technique. Ed. 3. Methuen and Co., London. 
BOLLES LEE, A. (1950). The Microtomist’s Vade-mecum. Ed. 11. Churchill, London. 
BUTT, F. M. (1934). Embryology of Sciara (Sciaridae: Diptera). Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 27, 
565-79. 
CANNON, H. G. (1936). A Method of Illustration for Zoological Papers. The Ass. of British 
Zoologists. 
128 
REFERENCES 
CARLETON, H. M. and LEACH, E. H. (1938). Histological Technique. Ed. 2. Oxford Univ. 
Press. 
DREW, G. (1900). A modification of Patten’s method of embedding small objects. Zool. Anz. 23, 
170. 
GAMBRELL, F. L. (1933). The embryology of the blackfly Simulium pictipes Hagen. Ann. Ent. Sot. 
Amer. 26, 641-71. 
HAUPT, A. W. (1930). Stain Tech. 5, 97. Given by BOLLES LEE, p. 634. Ed. 10. 
LISON, L. (1936). Histochimie animale. Gauthier-Villars, Paris. 
NELSON, J. A. (1915). The Embryology of the Honey Bee. Oxford Univ. Press. Pp. 251-3. 
NORMAN, J. R. (1923). Methods and technique of reconstruction. J. Roy. Micr. Sot. 1923, 
37-56. 
PANTIN, C. F. A. (1923). The determination of pH of microscopic bodies. Nature, Lond., 111, 81. 
PANTIN, C. F. A. (1946). See under (a-g). 
PAT-TEN (1894). 2. wiss. M&r. 11, 13. Abstract in BOLLES LEE, p. 84. Ed. 10. 
PUSEY, H. K. (1939). Methods of reconstruction from microscopic sections. J. Roy. Micr. Sot. 
59, 232. 
SLIFER, E. H. and KING, R. L. (1933). Grasshopper eggs and the paraffin method. Science, 78, 
366. 
TAHMISIAN, T. N. and SLIFER, E. H. (1942). Sectioning and staining refractory materials in 
paraffin. Science, 95, 284. 
WILSON, D. P. (1933). A simple block trimmer for the Cambridge rocking microtome. J. Roy. 
A&r. Sot. 53, (3), 25-7. 
(i) OTHER SPECIAL TECHNIQUES 
BARBOUR, H. G. and HAMILTON, W. F. (1926). The falling drop method of determining specific 
gravity. J. BioZ. Chem. 69, 625-40. 
BEAMENT, J. W. L. (1945). An apparatus to measure contact angles. Trans. Faraday Sot. 41, 
45-7. 
BERTRAM, D. S. and GORDON, R. M. (1939). An insectarium with constant temperature and 
humidity control, etc. Ann. Trap. Med. Parasit. 33, 279-88. 
BRUES, A. M. and SACHER, G. A. (1952). In Nickson’s Symposium on Radiobiology. Chapman and 
Hall, London. 
BUGHER, J. C. and TAYLOR, M. (1949). Radiophosphorus and radiostrontium in mosquitoes. 
Preliminary report. Science, 94, 146-7. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1931). The measurement and control of atmospheric humidity in relation to 
entomological problems. Bull. Ent. Res. 22, 43147. 
BUXTON, P. A. and MELLANBY, K. (1934). The measurement and control’of humidity. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 25, 171-5. 
IYENGAR, M. 0. T. (1930). Dissolved oxygen in relation to Anopheles breeding. Ind. J. Med. Res. 
17, 117-188. 
JENKINS, D. W. (1954). Advances in medical entomology using radio-isotopes. Exp. Parasit. 3, 
474. 
JOHNSON, C. G. (1940). The maintenance of high atmospheric humidities for entomological work 
with glycerol-water mixtures. Ann. AppZ. BioZ. 27, 295. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1933). Observations on Aedes aegypti L. (Diptera: Culicidae) under controlled 
atmospheric conditions. Bull. Ent. Res. 24, 363-72. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1947). See under (a-g). 
MARVIN, C. F. (1941). Psychrometric Tables. U.S. Dept. Commerce. Weather Bureau. (Obtain- 
able from C. F. Casella and Co. Ltd, Regent House, Fitzroy Square, London, W. 1). 
MICKS, D. W. (1954). Paper chromatography as a tool for mosquito taxonomy: the Culexpipiens 
group. Nature, Land., 174, 217-18. 
MUIRHEAD-THOMSON, R. C. (1940). Studies on the behaviour of Anopheles, etc. J. h&alar. Inst. 
India, 3, 265-94. 
PANTIN, C. F. A. (1923). See under (h). 
9 129 CH 
TECHNIQUE 
SCOTT, K. G. and PENG, C. T. (1957). Cerium 144 as a tag for arthropods of medical importance. 
Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 51, 87-8. 
SEATON, D. R. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1941). Observations on the effect of age, fertilization and 
light on biting by AL;des aegypti (L.) in a controlled microclimate. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 
35, 23-36. 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1926). Physical factors in mosquito oecology. Bull. Ent. Res. 16, 187-248. 
TERZION, L. A. (1953). The effect of X-irradiation in the immunity of mosquitoes to malarial 
infection. .J. Immunol. 71, 202-6. 
THERIAULT, E. J. (1925). The determination of dissolved oxygen by the Winkler method. U.S. 
Publ. Hlth Serv. Bull. 15 1, 43 pp. 
U.S.A. PUBL. HLTH Ass. (1920). Standard methods for the examination of water and sewage. 
130 
VI 
THEEGG 
(a) EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
EARLY DESCRIPTIONS OF THE EGG 
References in the literature to the characters of the egg of Ai’des aegypti with any claim to 
detail are few. Parker, Beyer and Pothier (1903) and Otto and Neumann (1905) describe 
and figure the white polygonal markings. Mitchell (1907) gives a very good outline drawing 
of the egg in respect to its shape and figures the polygonal markings. Goeldi (1905) 
figures the chorionic bodies. These were first described and figured by Theobald (1901) 
from observations by Daniels, as air chambers, which, seen in profile around the borders 
of the egg, they much resemble in appearance. Boyce (19 11) describes the egg as elongate, 
blackish in colour and rather sparsely studded with minute hemispherical bodies of whitish 
secretionary matter. Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912) describe the egg as fusiform, black, 
very slightly flattened on one side, slightly more tapered towards the micropilar end and 
with somewhat irregular callosities forming spiral rows. In the plates accompanying their 
monograph this hummocky appearance is shown in Figure 668, whilst Figure 684 shows 
an egg covered only with white polygonal markings. No explanation of the relation between 
the two figures is given. As explained later the seeming lack of agreement in the different 
descriptions is an indication of the very different appearance given by the eggs depending 
upon the conditions under which they are viewed. Some later descriptions give more 
detail, but are still far from describing the essential characters of the egg. It is only in the 
description by De Buck (1938) that any indication is given that the egg has a ventral and 
a dorsal surface with entirely different characters, or that the polygonal markings are air 
channels, or in which the nature of the chorionic bodies is indicated. De Buck’s paper 
describing in detail the structure of the exochorion indeed appears to have been somewhat 
overlooked and was so by the present writer until very recently. 
Of studies of related eggs may be mentioned the very detailed description of the structure 
of the Anopheles egg by Nicholson (1921), of the Culex egg by Vishna Nath (1924), and by 
Christophers (1945), as also the earlier work of Bresslau (1920). The eggs of a number of 
English species of AL;des are described and figured by James (1922, 1923), and also by 
Marshall (193Q giving measurements and the points in which they differ, as well as very 
clearly indicating the existence in many of these species of the peculiar clear refractile 
chorionic bodies described later, which are such a marked feature of the egg of AL;des 
aegypti, but which do not figure at all in the anopheline or culicine egg. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE EGG 
To the naked eye the eggs are small, intensely black, elongate oval, seed-like bodies under 
a millimetre in length. Under the microscope they appear somewhat torpedo-shaped with 
one end, the anterior, rather thicker and more abruptly tapered than the other. At the 
131 9-2 
THE EGG 
anterior pole is the micropile, indicated by a ring of transparent globular bodies similar to 
those to be described as characteristic of the upper (ventral) surface. The posterior pole 
has no special modification of structure such as has been described by me in the Culex egg 
(Christophers, 1945). 
Figure 4. Showing appearance of the egg under different 
conditions of wetness and moisture. 
A moist egg seen in lateral view (on edge of filter paper) showing chorionic pad, chorionic 
bodies and air channel reticulum. 
A submerged egg. Appearance similar whether dorsal or ventral surface shown. The extent 
of the chorionic pad when fully swollen shown in outline. 
Egg as seen in dry state. Lower surface (that is, dorsal in morphological sense). Genera& 
effect smooth or very finely granular. 
The same. Upper surface. Appearance as of hummocks with faint indications of polygonal 
markings. 
An egg (upper surface) still moist (but not wet) showing the chorionic bodies as brightly 
refractile bodies in a dark setting. 
Three eggs floating on the surface of water. The extent of the swollen transparent chorionic 
pad indicated by lines. 
Although the egg has been described above as torpedo-shaped, it is really rather boat- 
shaped with a flatter upper surface (morphologically the ventral in respect to the developing 
larva) and a more convex lower surface (morphologically the dorsal). These two surfaces 
further differ not only in shape but in other respects. Both are covered with polygonal 
markings which under certain circumstances stand out conspicuously as a network of 
milky white lines. These are in reality, as first pointed out by De Buck, fine channels at the 
base of the exochorion filled with air, thus accounting for their striking milk-white 
132 
EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
appearance when submerged. Similar lines are present on the under surface of some 
Anopheline eggs. 
The upper surface carries the peculiar transparent globular bodies described later as 
chorionic bodies. The appearances shown by this surface depend to a remarkable extent 
on whether the egg is being examined completely submerged or in various degrees of 
dryness. Submerged, no matter which surface is being viewed, the egg shows only the 
network of milky white lines on a dark background (Fig. 4 (2)). Out of the water, and 
especially as the egg surface dries, the white lines marking the polygonal areas are much 
less conspicuous and what now become the predominant feature of the upper or ventral 
surface are the low tuberosities formed by the chorionic bodies occupying the centres of 
the polygonal areas. In the still wet egg with a film of water over its surface these bosses 
may catch the light and give the effect of a surface covered with bright points of light, which 
are merely reflections from the wet tuberosities (clearly what Peryassu (1908) saw, who 
figures the egg with white points joined by pale lines). On a somewhat drier egg the 
tuberosities take on the appearance of bright refractile bodies each lying in the centre of 
a polygonal area. At a suitable stage of dryness and well illuminated these have the 
appearance of dull diamonds set in dark metal (Fig. 4 (5)). With the completely dry egg 
the chorionic bodies show up only as dark rounded hummocks. This is the appearance, 
rather like the surface of a pine-apple, described and figured by Howard and others 
(Fig. 4 (4)). Seen in profile on the margins of the egg as clear blebs the chorionic bodies 
may well be taken as a series of tiny air blisters or floats, as for many years they were 
supposed to be. 
The lower surface shows the network of air channels, but is devoid of chorionic bodies 
and in the dry egg appears uniformly smooth or finely granular (Fig. 4 (3)). The peculiarity 
of the lower surface is that its epichorion swells in water and forms a gelatinous pad, the 
chorionic pad. Depending upon the time the eggs have been in water and probably on the 
pH and possibly other conditions the chorionic pad forms a more or less thick pad of 
jelly-like material so transparent that when its surface has not been made apparent by 
attached particles of foreign matter it may easily be overlooked. When fully swollen it 
forms a kind of aureole surrounding the egg, sometimes up to nearly half the width of the 
egg in thickness (Fig. 4 (2, 6)). For some reason not ascertained it is sometimes not so 
noticeably swollen, even when eggs have been some time in water, but its presence is always 
evidenced by the way eggs stick to any surface against which they come to rest. The chorionic 
pad is in no way an adventitious secretion but represents a definite chorionic adaptation 
which as shown later has important functions. 
SITE OF OVIPOSITION 
The eggs of Ak’des aegypti appear never to be laid on a dry surface, though a wet surface 
appears to be preferred to that of water itself. Thus they are readily laid on wet filter paper, 
or wet sponge; or, by preference to actual water, in such situations as the floor of the 
cage wetted from a leaky pot. That eggs are laid in situ whether on a surface or on water, 
not merely dropped indiscriminately, is clear from the fact that almost invariably they are 
laid with the flatter ventral surface uppermost. On this account and for another reason 
described below it is nearly always the upper surface of the egg that is seen when viewing 
eggs under the microscope. On filter paper or other uniform wet surface the eggs are 
I33 
THE EGG 
usually freely scattered, though often laid in lines or small groups and especially along any 
irregularity such as where the edge of a filter paper strip rests on glass and often on lines 
formed by scarcely visible streaks in the glass of a specimen tube. In a vessel containing 
water and with the water surface freely available eggs are usually laid, not on the water, 
but on the sides of the vessel just above the water’s edge. A certain proportion are, 
however, laid on the water, especially if the receptacle is of glass which does not give the 
female a good foothold. The eggs have sometimes been described as drawn to the water’s 
edge by capillarity. Eggs may be so drawn, but the great majority after an oviposition are 
laid in situ in this position and, when dry, are so cemented. When large numbers of females 
are ovipositing in earthenware pots the massed eggs so laid may form a line around the 
vessel just above the water’s edge a centimetre in width and several eggs deep. 
When it is difficult for the female to oviposit on a wet surface, as by use of a glass vessel, 
eggs may be laid freely on the water where they float ventral surface upwards, often 
forming patterns as do Anopheline eggs. Though they have no floats or other obvious aid 
to flotation they are not so easily sunk as might be supposed. Nevertheless, when eggs are 
laid on water there are usually a certain number which have sunk to the bottom as well as 
those floating on the surface. Eggs so found after an oviposition are referred to later as 
‘ sunken eggs ‘. It is thought that eggs, when freshly laid and before changes referred to 
later occur, may be rather readily sunk and so liable to certain effects which may alter 
their future behaviour in hatching. This is one reason why, in determining the proportion 
of eggs hatching, etc., the use of porous earthenware as a surface for oviposition has a 
certain desirability. As pointed out by Fielding (1919), eggs may also be sunk through 
larvae nibbling around them. Such eggs would not be necessarily ‘sunken eggs’ in the 
sense used above. 
Functions of the chorionic pad. The chorionic pad is a most important structure functionally. 
With eggs laid in situ on a wet surface the sticky chorionic pad anchors the egg ventral 
side upwards to some extent as laid. Further, when the surface dries, the pad becomes a 
hard cement fixing the egg quite firmly in this position. Should such an egg be detached 
the exochorion, that is the dried pad, is left behind as a whitish flake and the lower surface 
of the egg, now denuded of its exochorion, shows the smooth shiny surface of endochorion. 
Even if eggs are not deposited originally in situ on a surface the sticky chorionic pad may 
still function. Its effect will be evident if some eggs sunk in water are left for a short time 
in contact with the glass at the bottom. On pouring off the fluid most of the eggs will be 
left behind adhering to the glass, and stranded eggs will be brought to rest by the sticky 
pad oriented with the ventral surface directed upwards. 
(b) STRUCTURE 
Morphologically the egg of A. aegypti has the general characters common to many insect 
eggs and consists, before fertilisation, of the ovum and remains of the nurse cells surrounded 
by a covering, the chorion, formed from the follicular epithelium and consisting of an outer 
layer, exochorion, and an inner layer, endochorion, which together form the egg-shell. 
In the freshly-laid egg the ovum, fertilised in the act of oviposition, consists of cytoplasm 
packed with yolk granules, whilst towards the anterior end lie the female and male pro- 
nuclei, the whole surrounded inside the chorion by the vitelline membrane corresponding 
to the cell wall of the ovum. In the more mature egg are the various stages of development 
I34 
STRUCTURE 
of the embryo, leading eventually to formation of the primary larva and its membranes as 
described in the chapter dealing with the embryology. 
i ..*.(<I: . *.y ::.* .::*.::*: 
-. ;?~.,~~,..:‘...:b.~.:.~~~~: . ...:. 
+,: ..,.:.., 2~:i.‘::::it:.G:.:.~ 
~lii~~~~~:. . :..~~~~,~~~~~ ..% 
-& - ;,*.+A . ..$. 5.. r;...; I:.-> ‘... *. ..r.....sc.;,.~.::;:. 
.v.;::;::;:.: . . . . . . . ,..,. pi . . . . . d,, . , =y...-“.. t . i: . . . . . I. 
s.;:.::: . AI.:12,:.~::,.:.~ .-:.L: ::. 
.&::::... .:‘:“$‘.... ;::,.. . . ...‘rc$Av.~:.~‘::. -2 . : :...jsl.t~~...::~.,,,: .:. ;+:...:2.: ‘::~~~.~.:.:::;~:i::A~~:~ 
. . ..*.>i :,.=::...: ..,.:::.:..,:‘.‘..::“r: . . . . . . . ,: .+.:.:.:::-.:::._. . . . 
. . . . :‘:..~.~,.:.~,.~:‘:,.~~~~ *.: ._.. . . . .:;. Z’ “. . 
. 
. . . . ‘g&y;:. .~...j$ $j -.v:.. : *:..<:p. . . 2.:. : . . . . ~., ..I . . . . . . .&:: 
.:...:. ‘$. . . . . . .:. . :, :.. ‘.-.::~_... 
. ..a.:.:.::i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -..:::y:: 
. . . . 
. ‘.*,‘&-.:: 
>~:.I . :. .*.q:: . :+yA% + b:yy$~>. .=.‘. :::: . :: ..; . . . . ..). :..:::-...:.....;.‘:t:>: . . . . . . ::‘. . ..q. . . . . . :-:.::‘:.2:::z,*:. 
,... _a.: . ..:-,:..2 ...*. . :.;.. :,v-. 
_ . ::‘-:..y:::. ‘.‘:....:: ;:;2 :*.y.::;v:. :<.._. 2:.: E... I:‘........ 
‘~.~~.::::::‘:i.~..~;~4::‘E:..‘,2. .:I.. . . . I . .:.: :.>+y. :‘: i:.r .p:. 
‘:.&z:j>i# ‘2~~~~$ :i: I+&.:_ . . . . . . :;.y>;:. 
*_.: z:;:., .> ,.....*.. :*qy 
. . 
OQQ. ’ <_:..f. . . . . * ._., . .._._ 
_.$.:.-p:: ..*... .r.:fi.:..:< ,.....: . . . . 
‘$;-$.:y,,* 
2 
@“;“* 3 4 
6 7 
@‘* 
Figure 5. Showing structure of the chorion. 
Egg-shell bleached by diaphanol showing the pattern formed by minute projections on the 
surface of the endochorion present only on the upper surface, the lower surface appearing 
blank though actually uniformly covered with small projections. The pattern is probably 
visible owing to the larger projections shown in Fig. 2 bounding the polygonal areas. 
Portion of above highly magnified showing central space where papillae are smaller or absent 
on which the chorionic bodies of the exochorion rest. 
Portion of the under surface. 
Oblique section of endochorion showing small surface projections and an inner cleared zone. 
Endochorion seen in optical section showing surface projections. 
Portion of endochorion fractured by crushing. Note tendency to longitudinal and transverse 
fracture, the longitudinal being in the direction of the length of the egg. 
‘Exploded’ egg. All such eggs show the lower (morphologically dorsal surface) burst. 
THE EXOCHORION 
The exochorion is a delicate, colourless and somewhat transparent membrane, which, 
especially when the egg is recently laid, is easily damaged or detached. It is also relatively 
much more easily affected by solvents and chemicals than is the harder more resistant endo- 
chorion. To the exochorion is due most of the ornamentation of the egg, so that eggs 
denuded of their exochorion show a uniform and smooth black surface. 
The structure of the exochorion can be demonstrated in detached flakes and in sections, 
or in the impressions left by eggs which have dried on the slide and been detached.* In 
* A technique for study of the exochorion of A2e.s eggs is given by Craig (1955). 
I35 
THE EGG 
the centre of each polygonal area, embedded in the substance of the exochorion and 
occupying its whole thickness, is one of the characteristic refractive bodies already referred 
to. These are almost globular or slightly flattened bodies, 9-l 1 p in diameter. In flat 
Figure 6. Showing structure of the chorion and the micropilar area. 
Portion of upper surface as seen in dry egg. 
The same of moist egg showing clear refractile bodies. 
Outline drawing showing chorionic bodies and small accessory masses of upper surface with 
air channels and an air-lock. 
Portion of exochorion at junction of upper and lower surface showing chorionic bodies and 
small accessory bodies, the latter alone present on under surface. 
Section through egg-shell showing chorionic bodies of exochorion and the underlying endo- 
chorion. Some small accessory bodies are present in the exochorionic matrix. 
Section through exochorion showing air channel cut near bifurcation. 
Portion of exochorion from under surface left as impression on slide from a dried-on egg. 
Small rod-shaped bodies and air-locks shown. Some of the fine projections on the surface 
of the endochorion are seen here and there in the line of air-channels which are shown by this 
preparation to be in the substance of the exochorion. 
View of micropilar area seen on flat. The outlying bodies are some of those in the first row of 
the general egg surface. 
Lateral view of same. 
preparations of the chorion they appear as clear, approximately circular bodies with a 
slightly wavy contour. They are transparent and at the margin of the egg they look very 
much like small air blebs. They are, however, entirely solid and appear to be composed of 
136 
STRUCTURE 
a dense transparent almost crystalline material of a protein nature, since they stain pink 
with Millon’s reagent. They are the ‘hemispherical bodies of whitish secretionary matter’ 
of Boyce. They are easily shed from the exochorion matrix retaining their shape and 
appearance. In the fresh state they stain with watery methylene blue or eosin and are 
deeply and apparently selectively stained by watery thionin. Seen in section they occupy 
the middle of a slight depression in the endochorion corresponding to the polygonal area 
in which they lie. Though they appear to occupy the position of the original follicle cell 
nucleus they stain in section as eosinophil matter and do not take up haematoxylin 
staining. Under very high magnification they show indications of consisting of agglo- 
merated sago-like masses, an appearance which is accentuated by treatment with con- 
centrated H2S04 or HCl. 
Besides these bodies there are present smaller irregular masses which appear to be of 
the same material. They lie more or less scattered in the polygonal area and on the under 
surface of the egg especially. They are rod-like or wedge-like and are arranged at right 
angles to the surface. In fresh preparations of detached exochorion they give the appearance 
of granules, but in dried flakes most of them are seen lying flat when their rod shape is 
apparent (Fig. 6 (5, 6, 7)). 
The boundaries of the polygonal areas are formed by air channels. These lie in spaces at 
the base of the exochorion between this and the endochorion. The appearance of air-locks 
and other characteristic appearances of air leave no doubt as to their nature. They do not 
appear to have any definite walls, being merely spaces in the matrix of the exochorion with 
support or anchoring from a line of projection in the endochorion, as described later, sur- 
rounding the polygonal area. 
The exochorion of the under surface of the egg is very similar in essential structure to 
that on the upper surface, except that the centrally situated refractive bodies are not 
present in the polygonal areas. The smaller peg-like bodies are, however, present and rather 
more developed than on the upper surface. Seen in profile in the swollen chorionic pad 
these appear as erect wedges presumably giving some support to the jelly-like mass. Here 
the air channels do not appear to receive any special support from the endochorion, though 
equally developed with those on the upper surface. 
THE ENDOCHORION 
The endochorion is a dense, tough and hard membrane some 3-5 p in thickness, which 
gives the egg its shape and rigidity. By reflected light it is an intense almost jet black and 
it is almost black even by transmitted light. It is brittle and fractures in much the same sort 
of fragments as glass or china, though it is obviously not so rigid as these substances. In 
sections it may give the appearance of an inner thin layer of lighter colour continued 
without break into the main thickness of the membrane. Such a distinction into two layers 
has not, however, been otherwise demonstrable even after prolonged soaking in various 
mixtures of glycerine and HCl and subsequent soaking in water. The membrane is not 
dissolved or noticeably affected by heating to 160” C. in saturated KOH for 15 minutes 
and is generally resistant to chemicals, except chlorine which decolorises and somewhat 
softens it. When ruptured by the hatching larva the fracture forming the cap is obliquely 
transverse, but if ruptured artificially or burst by internal pressure the endochorion splits 
for the most part into more or less longitudinal rectangular splinters (Fig. 5 (6)). 
=37 
THE EGG 
The outer surface of the endochorion is covered by closely aggregated minute papillae. 
Seen on the flat under a high magnification these appear as a speckling of dots. When seen 
in profile they seem to be hemispherical in shape projecting about half their diameter. 
They measure less than 1-O p in diameter and are not very apparent in sections except 
occasionally where the membrane is cut obliquely. On the lower surface of the egg they 
form intercurving rows so that the whole surface is fairly evenly and closely covered. On 
the upper surface the rows are more aggregated and the individual papillae are darker 
towards the boundaries of the polygonal areas where too in the actual line of the boundary 
the endochorion is sharply ridged. In the centre of the area, corresponding to the position 
of the refractive body in the overlying exochorion, the papillae are increasingly lighter in 
tint viewed from above and less numerous, being altogether absent in the middle of the 
area so that they form a kind of bed on which the refractive body lies (Fig. 5 (2)). As a 
result of this arrangement, especially when the endochorion has been rendered less dense 
by bleaching, the upper and lower surfaces of the egg are still indicated on the membrane, 
the upper surface being marked out in darkly bordered polygonal areas, whereas the lower 
surface is uniformly and very finely granular with no indication of such areas (Fig. 5 (3)). 
When eggs are ruptured from internal pressure (‘exploded eggs’) it is always the lower 
or dorsal aspect which is forced out, suggesting that the endochorion is here weaker than 
elsewhere. In sections, too, the membrane seems slightly thicker on the upper surface 
where it is slightly hollowed also opposite the polygonal areas. 
THE SEROSA 
In eggs where development has proceeded up to a certain stage there can be seen on 
bleaching the egg that there lies within the endochorion and surrounding the embryo a 
thin membrane, the serosa. This is very conspicuous in cleared egg-shells after hatching of 
the larva. It consists of a very thin hyaline membrane lying loosely within the empty 
egg-shell. When stained it shows sparsely-situated flattened circular nuclei. 
For formation of the egg membranes ‘in the ovary see section dealing with ovarian 
changes. Some points regarding the chemical nature of the membranes will be found 
under physiology of the egg. Developmental changes are dealt with in the chapter on 
embryology. 
(c) PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
LINEAR DIMENSIONS 
Various rough measurements of the egg of Ak’des aegypti have been given by different 
authors which are perhaps unnecessary to give in detail. The most accurate measurements 
recorded in the literature are those by Buxton and Hopkins (1927), who give the following, 
based on messurement of 105 eggs. 
Max. Mean Min. 
Length (mm.) 0.704 0.664 O-624 
Breadth (mm.) o-192 o-170 0.144 
These authors also give a frequency curve for length measurements. The curve is very 
nearly symmetrical with a peak at 0672 mm. There is, however, some extra loading in the 
region of small eggs, a point that will be referred to later. 
138 
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
Measurements of length in millimetres for 295 eggs taken at random are given in Table 3. 
The measurements have been made to the nearest division of the eyepiece scale used 
(1 div. = 0.01 mm. at mag. used) and include the micropilar ring. Measurements of 
greatest breadth varied from O-180 to O-210 mm. including the refractive bodies. If these 
are not included, about 0.01 mm. should be deducted. The greatest depth varied from 
0*180 to 0*190 mm. 
Date of 
examination 
made 
5. v. 47 (a) 
27. v. 47 (6) 
28. v. 47 (b) 
16. vi. 47 (c) 
11. viii. 47 (d) 
12. vii. 47 (e) 
Totals Table 3. Measurements of the length of the egg 
0.569 0.588 0.608 0.627 0,647 0.666 0.686 0.706 
- - - 1 6 27 19 5 
- 4 7 17 17 9 9 1 
1 2 5 9 13 7 3 - 
- - - - 2 5 3 6 
- 1 1 2 4 19 20 18 
- - 2 4 9 4 2 1 
1 7 15 33 51 71 56 29 O-725 O-745 O-765 Total 
1 - - 59 
- - - 64 
- - - 40 
- - - 14 
6 1 1 73 
- - - 22 
7 1 1 295 
(a) From isolated females 
(e) Kept moist 4 days. in tubes. (b) Dry on cover-glass. (c) Just dry on cover-glass. (d) Measured on water. 
It will be seen that the frequency curve is largely symmetrical with some loading in the 
region of the smaller eggs as in the Buxton and Hopkins measurements. This may be due 
to the fact that a small proportion of eggs may still not have been fully swollen even though 
black and apparently mature (see changes following oviposition). These measurements are 
practically identical with those of Buxton and Hopkins for the species in nature in Samoa, 
the mean length in the two cases being 0.662 and O-664 mm. Breadth is less easy to 
measure accurately, but there is nothing in the figures to indicate that the results are 
significantly different. 
A few other measurements may be given. The distance of the widest part of the egg from 
the anterior pole is about one-third of the length (O-22 mm.). The greatest depth is more 
near the middle of the egg. The egg-cap tear is about 0.25 of the egg length on the upper 
surface and about 0.19 of this on the lower surface from the anterior pole. 
WEIGHT 
I have not been able to find in the literature any reference to the weight of any mosquito 
egg. Those of A. aegypti are too small to weigh singly, even on the torsion balance, since 
one hundred go to the milligramme. They have been weighed in mass on a chemical 
balance and in numbers from twenty upwards on a 5 mg. torsion balance. 
As a result of experience in earlier weighings certain precautions were found to be 
necessary. Thus eggs weighed in mass though approximately dry may have a certain 
amount of free moisture included, and if dried further there was the possibility of some eggs 
becoming collapsed and shrunken. Further, with ‘sunken’ eggs especially, a certain 
amount of debris was liable to be attached to the sticky chorionic pad. Eggs collected 
from the surface of water floated on the cover-glasses could be allowed to dry and any 
shrunken eggs removed, but there were always scales from the surface of the water present. 
A number of earlier weighings, however, showed that the mean weight of the egg could not 
be over at most 0.0117 mg. or under 0.0109 mg. The mean of all weighings up to a certain 
date was 0.0113 mg. Finally to remove as far as possible all sources of error the procedure 
as described below was adopted. 
I39 
THE EGG 
Eggs taken still moist from the massive deposit at the water’s edge after a single night’s 
oviposition were kept moist for 4 days to ensure thorough conditioning. These were then 
washed quickly as described in the chapter on technique, transferred to a smooth porous 
tile and as soon as the fluid was absorbed and the eggs still moist they were spread about 
with a fine brush to allow them to dry without becoming attached to the tile. After 
examination and removal of any doubtfully damaged eggs a suitable number were weighed 
on the torsion balance. The results were very consistent as shown below and gave a mean 
weight for the conditioned egg in the dry state four days from oviposition of 0.0111 + 
0.0002 mg. Number of Weight Mean weight 
Date eggs (mg.) (mg.) 
19. 1. 48 79 0.87 O*OllO 
19. 1.48 92 1.02 0~0111 
26. 2.48 104 1.15 0~0110 
26. 2. 48 213 2.39 0.0112 
27. 2. 48 113 1.24 0*0110 
Eggs that had been kept some time gave the following results. 
Date Description Number 
(mg.) Weight 
(mg.) Mean weight 
(mg.) 
30. xii. 47 15 days dry (3 sets) 488 5.06 0.0104 
9. i. 48 25 days dry 186 1.94 0.0104 
13. ix. 47 Slightly shrunken 20 0.15 0.0075 
13. ix. 47 Shrunken to prismatic form 41 0.24 0.0059 
13. ix. 47 Flattened, saucer-like 20 0.08 0*0040 
From this it would appear that the loss of water in eggs still possibly viable is about 
OGO3 mg. or 28 per cent of the original weight. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY 
Though eggs are commonly found floating on the surface they are in this position clearly 
only because some portion of their surface is not wetted. Viewed from above, floating 
eggs usually show the water line encroached on the upper surface to an extent all round the 
egg of about one-quarter of its width, that is, very little extension of the wetted area is 
required to sink the egg. Once the egg is completely wetted by forcible submersion or 
addition of a surface tension lowering substance to the water it sinks at once. 
The specific gravity was determined by ascertaining that strength of solution of sodium 
sulphate in which selected conditioned eggs neither rose nor sank when introduced into 
the middle of the fluid by means of a pipette, the eggs being previously sunk in water to 
avoid any surface action. There was no reason to suppose that the small amount of water 
introduced with the egg affected the issue. A first observation gave the point as between 
1.074 and 1.076 and this was confirmed some months later by a second estimation as 
given below. Readings Corrected Readings 
taken as 
1.067 
1,071 
1 a073 
1.074 
1.075 
1.076 
1.077 
140 at 20” C. to 15” c. 
1.066 1.0668 
1.070 1.0708 
1 a072 1.0728 
1.073 1.0738 
1.074 1.0748 
1.075 1.0758 
1.076 1 a0768 Result 
All sank eggs 
All sank eggs 
All sank eggs 
Eggs showed little tendency 
to sink or rise 
Eggs suspended without 
movement 
Eggs suspended without 
movement 
All rose eggs 
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
The eggs were used 3 days from collection. The weight of 1.10 C.C. of water at 20” C. is 
given in tables as O-998203 g. and at 15” C. as O-998956 g., giving the correction factor 
used of lOOO75. The findings give the specific gravity at 15” C. of conditioned eggs 3 days 
old as l-075-6. Though such a density may seem high, it is not so great as the density given 
by Bodine and Robbie (1943), for some stages of the grasshopper egg (see under changes 
following oviposition). Some larvae which hatched in the fluid seemed slightly lighter than 
the eggs. 
VOLUME 
Volume of the egg should be given by the relation weight/density = volume, which taking 
weight and density as determined would.be 0.0103 mm.3. However, it was thought desir- 
able to determine the volume directly if possible and after some tentative trials a modifi- 
cation of the method used by C. G. Johnson (1937) in measuring the volume of the egg of 
Notostirus was employed. The method consists in making use of a U-shaped tube with a 
bore somewhat under 1.0 mm., one end of which is drawn out to a fine capillary point. 
This is linked to a thermometer by a fine rubber band, the whole being included in an outer 
tube kept at a uniform temperature by circulating tap water. The tube is emptied or filled 
by suction and the application of filter paper to the fine capillary tip by which the meniscus 
in the opposite limb can be brought to any desired level. For a full description the author’s 
paper should be consulted. In place, however, of determining volume by differences in 
weight this was done by direct observation of change in position of the meniscus as observed 
through a binocular microscope in the horizontal position with an eyepiece scale and using 
a marked portion of the tube and as small a displacement as possible to avoid parallax. 
Though the apparatus was much the most promising of any used, it required considerable 
care in manipulation and especially in calibration. It was calibrated by dropping in small 
measured amounts (l-3 mm.3) of mercury from a blood-measuring pipette after testing this. 
One difficulty was to get the dry eggs to sink without manipulation. This was finally 
achieved by the use of butyl alcohol in the tube and using the point of a fine pipette cut 
off to make a tiny funnel, so preventing eggs when tipped in from sticking on the sides of 
the tube above the fluid. With butyl alcohol the eggs sank at once and appeared not to 
be affected when examined later. Kerosene was also effective in allowing eggs to sink at 
once, but the exochorion was swollen and tended to become detached. A 4 per cent 
solution of tauroglycocholate was also tried, but was less satisfactory than butyl alcohol. 
The following are the results obtained. 
Displacement 
of meniscus Total volume Mean 
Date of (divisions (1 div. Number volume 
observation Fluid used of scale) O-193 mm.3) of eggs (mm.3) 
21. i. 48 4 per cent sodium tauroglyco- 22.0 4.246 424 O*OlOO 
cholate 
26. ii. 48 Kerosene 3.0 0.580 64 0.009 1 
27. ii. 48 Butyl alcohol 15.0 2.895 279 0.0104 
27. ii. 48 Butyl alcohol 16.0 3.100 304 0.0102 
In each of the last three observations the mean weight of the eggs weighed on the torsion 
balance was 0.0110 mg. 
Though the later observations give figures in keeping with the theoretical value, it was 
not felt that volume determination direct was sufficiently critical to do more than support 
values obtained for weight and density. The method used as above appeared, however, one 
THE EGG 
very suitable for volume determination of small objects and probably could have been 
made very accurate provided error due to varying angle in reading the meniscus was kept 
small. 
In the next subsection reference is made to a model used to supplement information 
regarding surface area of the egg, the model being of the correct weight in proportion to 
length and, as far as was possible, the accurate shape of the egg. Displacement of the 
model was 13.25 ml., and since the volume of the model (see next section) was calculated 
to be 1,286,OOO times that of the egg this gave a value of 0.0103 mm.3 for the mean volume 
of the egg. 
SURFACE AREA 
An estimation of surface area was made from a camera lucida drawing of a flattened and 
completely disrupted egg-shell and its cap at a magnification of 170. Including areas of 
overlapping which were clearly displayed, this gave 0.052 mm.2 as the area of the cap and 
O-266 mm.2 as that of the rest of the shell. The total area on this computation was therefore 
0.3 18 mm.2. The area of the cap in this case was about one-sixth of the total area of the egg. 
As a further way of arriving at such an estimate a model was made in plasticine as nearly 
as possible the shape of the egg. Its length measured by gauge was 72 mm. In this 
respect it therefore represented an egg (mean length 0.662 mm.) multiplied 108.76 times 
linear dimensions. The volume should therefore be 108~76~ or 1,286,OOO times that of the 
actual egg and if the model were of the same density as the egg its weight should have been 
this number of times the weight of the egg or 14.275 g. The specific gravity of the plasticine 
was, however, 1.675 whilst that of the egg as previously given was l-075 giving the weight 
for the model as 22.242 g. This with very slight adjustment was made the weight. * The 
circumference of the model was now taken at intervals of 0.5 cm. projection, which plotted 
on squared paper gave the area enclosed as 35.2 cm.2 and this divided by the square of the 
linear magnification (11828) gave as the area of the egg 0.297 mm.2. 
A value of about O-3 mm.2 may, therefore, be given for the surface area of the egg. 
WEIGHT AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF THE EGG-SHELL 
The following observations were made on the weight of the egg-shell and cap. 
Weight 
(mg.1 
Egg-shells without cap, dry overnight 0.075 
Egg-shells without cap, dry overnight 0.35 
Egg-shells without cap, dry overnight 0.30 
Egg caps, dry overnight 0.06 
Egg-shells with attached caps, dry 0.02 
Egg-shells with attached cap, dry 0.14 Number 
91 
465 
380 
377 
20 
140 Mean weight 
(mg.1 
0~00082 
0*00079 
0*00079 
0.00016 
0.001 
0.001 
The mean weight of the egg-shell complete is, therefore, approximately OWl mg. and 
that of the egg-cap 0.00016 mg. or again about one-sixth of the total egg-shell. 
It was thought possible that the shell when forming part of the egg might not be so dry 
as when treated as above. The following results are, however, in favour of the view that 
the weight as given above is at least approximately that of the shell as it exists in the egg, 
* The weight 
adjustment. of the model before this alteration was 22.107 g., so that it required only less than 1 per cent 
142 
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
there being no further loss of water after the wet shells have been exposed to the laboratory 
for 30 minutes. 
Direct from porous tile 0.98 mg. 
After 15 minutes 0.54 mg. 
After 30 minutes 0.29 mg. 
After drying overnight 0.30 mg. 
Determination of the specific gravity of the egg-shell after hatching was made by trans- 
ferring egg-shells from water into solutions of sodium sulphate of known density, and 
allowing a short time for diffusion of contained water into the surrounding medium. The 
shells sank in all the concentrations used up to a density of 1*2OO. Placed in a solution of 
this density egg-shells sank to the bottom in from 5 to 10 minutes. Whole eggs remained 
floating even overnight. 
The specific gravity of keratin in the dry state is given by Robertson (19 18) as 1.3 18 and 
as the egg-shell is evidently of protein nature and very hard and tough it may well have 
a density approaching that of keratin. 
(d) CHANGES FOLLOWING OVIPOSITION 
COLOUR CHANGES 
When first laid the eggs of AtYdes aegypti are of a translucent pure white and seen against 
a white background such as filter paper are scarcely visible at a casual glance. Whether 
exposed to light or not they soon darken. O’Connor (1923) gives 15 minutes for becoming 
grey and 40 for black. Buxton and Hopkins (1927) consider this too short a time, as in the 
case of a female seen laying eggs at 4.30 p.m. the eggs were grey at 6 and black at 7 p.m. 
Actually the first change occurs in about an hour (see Table 4), the eggs gradually darkening, 
rather more rapidly as they are becoming black. 
Table 4. Change in colour and size of the egg 
following upon oviposition 
Obs. 1 Obs. 2 
, 
Time from Mean ’ 
oviposition 
(minutes) 
In oviduct 
Immediate 
30 
60 Colour 
White 
White 
White 
Faint tint of blue length 
(mm.) 
0.467 
0*500 
- 
0.522 
iii 
120 
150 
180 
210 - - 
Pale blue - 
Darkish blue 0550 
Blue black - 
Blue black - 
Black - 
240 Black 0600 
20 hours Black 0.684 L 
I \ 
Mean 
length 
Colour (mm.) 
White - 
White - 
White - 
White - 
Faint tint of blue - 
Pale blue - 
Darkish blue 0560 
Dark blue - 
Blue black 0.580 
One black, one - 
blue-black 
Black 0.620 
Black - 
What does not seem to have been recorded is the colour of the darkening eggs which is 
a distinct and at times a vivid blue. The first tint is a pale watery blue which begins to be 
apparent in about an hour from oviposition. This colour darkens and in about 3 hours the 
I43 
THE EGG 
eggs are a deep blue-black. Complete darkening to black takes about 4 hours. The egg 
develops colour and darkens uniformly and not as in the Culex egg first in a zone around 
the posterior pole (Christophers, 1945) (see also under ‘Physiology of the egg’, p. 154). 
CHANGES IN VOLUME, WEIGHT AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY 
Eggs when first laid are not only white in colour but are much smaller than the mature 
black egg. In Table 4 are given measurements (together with colour changes) as observed 
in eggs seen to have been oviposited and kept under observation for some hours. Those in 
the first series relate to six eggs and those in the second series to two eggs. It will be evident 
that there is a steady increase in size which continues even after the eggs in about 4 hours 
have become black. As shown by measurements given in the table there is an increase in 
the length of the egg when oviposited amounting to 0.66 of its length in the oviduct. 
A similar increase amounting to O-1 is noted by Roy and Majundar (1939) for the egg of 
Culex fatigans and a similar lengthening of the egg of Anopheles subpictus and A. annularis 
is recorded by Roy (1940). There is then a further increase from the length when laid to 
that at 20 hours of 1.37. Such an increase, provided there was no change in shape, would 
correspond to the cube of this amount, that is to 2.57 times the volume when laid. Actually 
the egg does change slightly in shape, being somewhat more oval and less torpedo-shaped 
when first laid, the diameter being about the same as that of the mature egg, but the general 
order of the estimate should hold. This increase can only be brought about by imbibition 
of water, so that the egg must imbibe about its own volume of water during this period. 
The imbibition in the first few hours at least would appear to be fairly uniform, the rate 
of increase in length being about 0.02 mm. per hour. 
Since the volume of the egg increases, which can only be by taking in water, the specific 
gravity of the newly laid egg should be greater than that of the mature egg. This is actually 
so. Determination of the specific gravity of white eggs some little time after oviposition 
gave a density of 1.098. On another occasion white eggs sank in sodium sulphate solution 
of 1.130 sp.gr. Some black eggs previously laid rose at the same time that the white eggs 
sank. Fully developed eggs taken from gravid females slowly sink even at 1.130 and even 
the whole ovary sinks without hesitation when introduced into fluid of this or slightly less 
density. The condition in the egg of A&les aegypti would seem, therefore, very similar to 
that described by Bodine and Robbie (1943) in the grasshopper egg. These authors give 
the density of the grasshopper egg as varying from about 1.13 to about l-06, whilst the 
weight due to absorption of water increases from 3.2 to 6.0 mg. Development in this case 
takes 18 days to reach diapause and a further 18 days following upon diapause to reach full 
development. The egg of A. aegypti absorbs water and swells to about double its size in 
a few hours. Before such intake it has a high density, again very similar to that described 
in the grasshopper egg. 
DESICCATION 
Provided eggs are kept moist they retain their shape and if first kept moist for a period of 
24-72 hours they do so even if exposed to prolonged desiccation. If not kept moist for 
this initial period they dry and collapse even in a matter of minutes. As noted by MacGregor 
(19 16) two chief forms of collapsed eggs are seen. With a moderate degree of collapse the 
sides of the egg flatten or fall in leaving a central ridge so that the egg is prismatic or tri- 
I44 
CHANGES FOLLOWING OVIPOSITION 
radiate in section. In a more completely collapsed form the egg is completely flattened in 
a saucer-shaped fashion. These two forms of collapsed egg are quite characteristic, but all 
degrees of collapse are seen from a slight dimpling to completely flattened saucer-like eggs 
as described by MacGregor. The former in profile appear narrower than normal, the latter 
considerably broader when seen on the flat, but narrowly crescentic seen on edge. 
When eggs are removed from a moist atmosphere shortly after being laid all may collapse 
completely within some minutes. As resistance to desiccation increases, some eggs collapse 
while others remain unshrunken though these latter may in turn, if the eggs are not fully 
conditioned, also eventually collapse within a variable time. After full resistance has been 
achieved, which may require keeping in a moist atmosphere for several days, eggs remain 
rounded and normal for periods of weeks or months. Eventually, however, perhaps after 
some months to a year, depending on conditions, these too become collapsed, the number 
so collapsing increasing with time. The process of keeping eggs in a moist condition until 
they become resistant to desiccation has been termed by Shannon and Putnam (1934) 
‘conditioning’, and eggs in such a state may conveniently be termed ‘ conditioned eggs ’ 
(see ch. v). 
SWOLLEN AND EXPLODED EGGS 
When eggs collapsed from desiccation are placed in water they swell up and are scarcely 
distinguishable from normal unshrunken viable eggs. Such eggs are, however, at once 
identified when treated with diaphanol or other bleaching agent, since they show only dis- 
organised contents or macerated embryos. They often form the bulk of unhatched eggs 
left behind with empty egg-shells from which larvae have hatched, and unless the condition 
is recognised may lead to error from being mistaken for viable eggs that have not yet 
hatched. Sometimes such swollen-up eggs may appear as specially large eggs and may 
measure up to O-8 mm. in length. 
What is probably the final stage of such swollen-up eggs are ruptured or ‘ exploded’ eggs. 
In this case one surface of the egg, apparently always the dorsal, that is the under surface 
and the one nearest to the yolk remnant, is burst outwards in a long tongue giving with the 
rest of the egg an appearance much like a safety pin. Or there may be such a tongue at 
each end of the egg, which then resembles a penknife with two blades half open (Fig. 5 (7)). 
Such ruptured eggs never show any indication of the forcing off of an egg-cap, showing 
that the latter structure is not the result of any structural condition of the chorion (see 
under ‘ Mechanism of hatching ‘, p. 162). 
Ruptured eggs as described above are evidently what Howard, Dyar and Knab refer to 
when they say that eggs in prolonged immersion do not remain intact but split open 
longitudinally. Young (1922) also refers to split and collapsed eggs. 
A certain number of eggs, depending upon circumstances, may be unfertilised. These do 
not differ from normal viable eggs until bleached, when the absence of embryo formation is 
apparent. A common appearance when bleached is the rounding up of the yolk into one 
or more globular masses whilst other eggs are showing various stages of embryo formation. 
Besides unfertilised eggs, obviously abnormal eggs are sometimes seen. The commonest 
form of such are small oval eggs. On one or two occasions a very large egg has been seen, 
half as long again as a normal egg. Among the usual black eggs on the surface of the 
water newly laid white eggs may be seen and may be mistaken on account of their small 
size for prematurely laid eggs. Or some of such may be prematurely laid eggs which are 
IO I45 
THE EGG 
not darkening. Prematurely laid eggs may sometimes be seen which have swollen up to 
resemble a coiled worm, a shape seen when follicles in the ovary at certain stages are 
treated with potash, that is the wall of the follicle does not yield to swelling evenly but 
causes the swollen follicle to elongate. 
CHANGES DUE TO DEVELOPMENT 
Since eggs in their natural condition are intensely black and opaque, nothing of their 
contents is visible by direct observation without some form of bleaching. After diaphanol 
or chlorine treatment, however, various stages in the formation of the embryo up to the 
fully developed primary larva can be seen. A detailed account of the embryology would 
here be out of place, but a brief description of the embryology of the mosquito as worked 
out on Culex molestus is given later in chapter VII. The following are the most obvious 
appearances which may be seen in ordinary manipulation of eggs. 
Eggs which contain fully developed larvae ready to hatch show when bleached towards 
the anterior pole three conspicuous dark spots, two lateral, the pigmented ocelli of the 
larva, and one median dorsal, the egg-breaker. At this stage the large head occupies about 
one-third of the egg and there is a smaller mass at the posterior pole consisting of the 
siphon and other terminal parts. Between these two masses are clearly shown the three 
thoracic and eight abdominal segments, all very compacted like a rouleau of coins 
(Fig. 9 (1)). Many larvae at this stage will, however, almost certainly be extruded from the 
egg due to the effect of the bleaching agent as described later. The segments in such cases 
are no longer compacted but widely expanded and separated by deep notches. It may be 
noted that Roubaud (1927) terms the larva whilst still contained in the egg, the primary 
larva, a name which may sometimes be usefully employed. 
In larvae not quite fully developed eye-spots may be present, but not the spot indicating 
the egg-breaker, or still earlier even the eye-spots are not to be made out, or as is often the 
case, these are visible but not conspicuous. 
Still earlier stages show various appearances of the developing embryo. A very charac- 
teristic stage is one in which the anterior end of the embryo is bifid, due to the presence of 
the labial groove and another one in which, the groove having everted, there is a bulbous 
prominence anteriorly. At such stages the body of the embryo is elongate and curved on 
itself with the caudal segments lying along the dorsal aspect to within a varying distance 
from the head. The appearances seen depend upon the position in which the egg is viewed. 
If seen from the dorsal or ventral aspect there is a somewhat sausage-shaped body, bifid 
or with a protrusion in front as described. If seen lying upon its side the embryo appears as 
a bulbous head with a narrow bent hairpin-like body. Earlier stages are usually not 
recognisable except in stained specimens where the blastoderm stages may be charac- 
teristically shown. 
Segmentation becomes apparent at about 24 hours from oviposition. Eye-spots become 
visible at about 70 hours at 25” C. Conspicuous eye-spots with egg-breaker are first seen 
at about 90 hours at this temperature. Eggs between 24 and 48 hours usually show the 
bifid appearance or globular protrusion as described above. Eggs younger than 24 hours 
show what appears as a more or less uniform yolk mass, though in sections various stages 
in cleavage and blastoderm formation are strikingly shown. The times given are for Culex 
molestus for which the full development takes about 56 hours. For Agdes aegypti somewhat 
longer may be allowed. 
I46 
VIABILITY 
(e) VIABILITY OF EGGS UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS 
RESISTANCE TO DESICCATION 
That the eggs of A. aegypti are capable of retaining their viability for long periods of 
desiccation was first brought to the notice of workers in this country by Theobald (1901), 
who hatched out in England eggs sent from Cuba which had been dry in a tube for 
2 months. But that eggs may remain a long time in the dry state without losing their 
vitality had been noted as early as 1886 by Finlay, who sent the eggs referred to above to 
Theobald. 
Numerous later observations on the length of time that eggs of A. aegypti kept in the 
dry state can retain their viability have been given in the literature. Francis (1907) found 
eggs kept dry for 4 months still viable. Newstead and Thomas (1910) obtained larvae from 
eggs sent from Manaos after these had been dried for 24 hours over CaCl, and kept 
45-47 days in a tightly corked tube. Bacot (1916) found eggs still viable that had been 
stored under dry conditions for 262 days and the same author (1918) found eggs kept dry 
at a temperature varying between 6.6” and 178” C. on filter paper still viable after 15 months. 
Fielding (1919) found a percentage of eggs kept at room temperature still living after 
257 days (8$ months). Eggs stored 391-579 days did not hatch. Shannon and Putnam 
(1934) state that, if well conditioned, eggs can be kept stored for six months without high 
mortality and that about 5 per cent will survive a year or more. 
Such statements do not, however, give the whole picture, for as noted by Buxton and 
Hopkins (1927) the longer eggs are stored the greater the mortality. In Fielding’s series 
the percentage of different batches which hatched at times between 114 and 216 days varied 
from 21 to 58 per cent with one exception. At 257 days only 1 per cent hatched. Bonne- 
Wepster and Brug (1932) give the following data obtained by their assistant R. Soebekti 
for imagos bred out from eggs kept various times in the dry state and placed to hatch in 
grass infusion. 
Period Percentage of hatchings Means 
1 month 60, 60, 23, 14, 100, 52, 40 46.5 
2 months 4, 12, 13, 10, 36, 66, 18, 44, 26, 28, 60, 3, 60 34.0 
3 months 65, 0, 0, 8, 12 17-o 
4 months 4, 8, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 l-6 
5 and 6 months 0, 0, 090 o-0 
In nature Cooling (1924) found that eggs collected from a tree-hole hatched, though 
they must have been dry for from 12 to 14 weeks. 
The longest period in the experience of the present author has been 233 days (8 months) 
when an egg-pot kept at 25” C. and 70 per cent relative humidity and containing some 
thousands of eggs yielded only ten larvae on the second day of submergence. Other 
examples of pots under similar conditions kept for periods over two months are: 
Batch Days kept 
number dry 
960 (2) 233 
977 (1) 209 
981 A 166 
969 (2) 108 
977 (2) 107 
970 (2) 102 
968 (3) 71 
968 (2) 66 Result of 
placing to hatch 
Ten larvae on second day 
One or two larvae only 
About 200 larvae from fragment overnight 
Many in 90 minutes 
Many 
Many hundreds from small fragment 
Normal hatch 
Normal hatch. A small fragment with sixty- 
one eggs gave 100 per cent hatch overnight 
I47 IO-2 
THE EGG 
It is evident that under such conditions and protected from psoci, cockroaches, etc., eggs 
up to 100 days had largely retained viability. The general experience has been that up to 
one month eggs have not appreciably lost viability or exhibited delay in hatching, and that 
no serious loss in viability took place up to 4 months. After this results were uncertain and 
after six months rarely more than a small percentage hatched. Shannon and Putnam also 
state that well-conditioned eggs, if used within a month, should serve as well as freshly 
conditioned eggs for routine rearing. 
The time eggs remain viable, however, is largely dependent on the degree of desiccation 
to which they are exposed and where a relatively high humidity is not present the period 
for which they remain viable is usually much reduced. In the laboratory keeping eggs in 
a closed container under damp conditions favours long viability, but care is required since 
if left without occasional airing mould may cause trouble and if too moist premature and 
imperfect hatching may occur as described later. 
Artificial desiccation greatly reduced the viability period. Fielding found some eggs 
kept over CaCl, still living after 19 days, but all were dead after 26 days. Buxton and 
Hopkins found that eggs kept over HzS04 were all killed in from 30 to 40 days. Eggs kept 
in the laboratory without precautions showed collapsed eggs very much earlier than when 
kept in the constant temperature room at a raised humidity. 
Development of resistant properties. The dormancy of the egg of A. aegypti is dependent on 
the formation of the primary larva, a term applied by Roubaud (1927) to the larva whilst 
still in the egg, and is not due to arrest of embryonic development as is more usually the 
case in diapause of insect eggs. Bacot (19 17) seems to have been the first to note that moist 
conditions were essential for some time after laying if the eggs were to resist desiccation. 
He gives for this a period of about 30-40 hours by which time he says the larva was fully 
developed in the egg. Buxton and Hopkins emphasise the importance of this period which 
they term ‘maturation’, pointing out that observations relating to viability of eggs under- 
taken without regard to the period of maturation are valueless. H. A. Johnson (1937) 
found in dissection of freshly laid eggs that the embryo was not developed. As eggs aged 
the embryos progressed to the point of hatching, provided eggs were kept moist. If eggs 
dried out, the young embryos died before maturing. 
The time necessary to keep eggs moist to ensure their viability when subjected to desic- 
cation has very generally been given as about 24 hours. MacGregor (19 16) gives the 
following results of drying eggs at different times after oviposition: 
Maximum time left on water (hours) 15 20 25 37 43 48 60 65 70 
Percentage collapsed after drying 12 hours 100 100 100 62 28 2 0 0 0 
At 15 hours eggs collapsed in 15 minutes. 
Buxton and Hopkins found that of 295 eggs which had been dried when they were not 
more than 24 hours old, 197 (67 per cent) hatched. Shannon and Putnam, however, for 
optimum conditioning give several days on damp filter paper which is placed in the open air 
to dry slowly. 
The following are results obtained with eggs laid by isolated females on filter paper strips 
in tubes kept moist at the temperature noted and allowed to dry after various periods. 
The eggs referred to in the table were those laid on the paper slips and not the whole 
oviposition. 
148 
VIABILITY 
Female 
12 
3 
8 
5 
18 
13 
10 
21 
14 
16 
22 Temperature 
at which 
eggs kept 
(” C.) 
25 
28 
28 
28 
28 
25 
25 
28 
28 
25 
25 
28 Allowed to 
dry after 
hours 
4 
20 
20 
20 
20 
24 
44 
44 
48 
69 
69 
72 Collapsed 
25 
5 
4 
3 
2 
2 
2 
- 
0 
0 Not 
collapsed 
0 
9 
23 
17 
63 
11 
10 
8 
42 
12 
6 Per cent 
Hatched hatched 
0 0 
9 
10 
8 91 
42 
12 
5 
I 96 
6 
Though the majority of eggs kept moist for 24 hours after oviposition had become 
capable of resisting collapse on drying overnight, some eggs were still collapsed which had 
been kept moist for 48 hours or more. Obviously, however, 48 hours had sufficed to allow 
protection to be achieved by the great majority of eggs. 
In the main, loss of viability runs paripassu with collapse, so that long-stored eggs which 
are seen to be collapsed may be expected to give at the best a small yield of larvae. To what 
extent collapse is certain evidence of loss of viability was tried out in the following series, 
which was a sample of fifty-five eggs taken from a pot some 6 months old in which the 
eggs appeared all more or less collapsed. 
One egg apparently unshrunken 
Thirty-one eggs showing various de- 
grees of collapse of prismatic 
form Larva hatched in 3 hours 
Five larvae (four in 3 hours), two 
dead larvae, two half emerged 
Twenty-three eggs flattened or grossly 
shrunken No larvae overnight 
As a rule therefore eggs showing a marked degree of collapse have ceased to be viable. 
A small percentage of moderately collapsed eggs may, however, still be viable. 
Briefly, everything points to the fact that if eggs are prevented from drying up until the 
larva is fully formed they have the power of resisting desiccation and retaining their via- 
bility for long periods in the dry state. It does not necessarily follow that it is the larva 
itself which has this power. Indeed, it is almost certain that such resistance is due to water- 
proofing of the egg membranes at some stage, which one would expect to begin some time 
before 24 hours from oviposition. The onset of waterproofing must indeed take some hours, 
for up to some 6 hours or possibly longer the eggs are actively absorbing water (see under 
‘ Changes following oviposition’, p. 144). 
Duly protected from desiccation the embryo develops to the larva in which state it has 
the remarkable power to lie dormant until the egg is again submerged, or until, as observed 
by Buxton and Hopkins, a slow desiccation ultimately destroys the egg or the reserves held 
by the larva are exhausted. This state of dormancy has been termed by Roubaud (1929) 
one of secondary diapause, diapause in most insect eggs occurring during, not at the end of, 
embryonic development. So far there is no evidence that any of the eggs of A. aegypti 
undergo any period of suspended development before the embryo becomes the primary 
larva. 
149 
THE EGG 
THE EFFECT OF HEAT AND COLD ON VIABILITY 
Bacot (1916) notes the following effects on viability of eggs exposed for 24 hours to 
different temperatures. 
29” F. (- 1.7” C.) 81 per cent hatched 
75” F. (24.0” C.) 80 per cent hatched 
95” F. (35.0” C.) 28 per cent hatched 
102” F. (39.0” C.) 12 per cent hatched 
1076” F. (42.0” C.) 0 per cent hatched 
Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903) exposed eggs taken from water the day after 
they were laid for 5 minutes to temperatures varying from 37” to 49” C. and found they 
afterwards hatched. Above 48” C. they failed for the most part to hatch and above 49” C. 
they did not develop. Macfie (1920) found that eggs withstood 5 minutes exposure to temp- 
eratures as high as 46” C. They were generally killed at temperatures above this and all 
were killed at 49” C. The same result was obtained with undried eggs about 24 hours old and 
eggs on filter paper kept dry for two months. 45” C. had no appreciable effect. Larvae, it 
may be noted, are rapidly killed at this temperature. Davis (1932) found that fresh eggs 
were killed by 48 hours exposure to 40” C., mature eggs in less than 7 days. In general it 
may be taken that the lethal temperature for short exposure to high temperatures is about 
49” C., but that temperatures as low as 40” C. are fatal for exposures lasting several days, 
and that 45” C. was fatal to all eggs, fresh and mature, within 24 hours, mature eggs being 
somewhat more resistant than those in an early stage of development. 
In regard to the effect of cold, Howard, Dyar and Knab state that freezing does not kill 
A. aegypti eggs. Davis (1932), however, found that freezing kills both fresh and mature 
eggs after 48 hours, fresh eggs being slightly more resistant. 
These results are in keeping with observations now made. Whilst eggs are not very 
susceptible to lethal effect from low temperature, such effect depends largely upon time 
of exposure. Two distinct issues are concerned, namely the lethal effect of low temperature 
and the limiting temperature at which development can proceed. In regard to lethal effect 
eggs exposed 24 hours at lo” C. hatched when placed at 25” C. Eggs after eleven days 
exposure at 7” C. on being placed at room temperature and then at 27” C. gave a 25 per 
cent hatch. Those exposed at 1.0” C. for nine days gave only a single larva out of some 
hundreds on being similarly treated. It was thought from these and other observations 
that the point at which prolonged exposure to low temperature ceased to be lethal was 
about 10” C. This is in keeping with Bacot’s observation that some eggs were viable after 
being kept some months at a variable cool temperature of from 6.6” to 17.8” C. 
The above remarks relate to conditioned eggs, that is eggs in which development has 
proceeded to formation of the primary larva before exposure. Where eggs are exposed from 
shortly after oviposition the question of delayed or inhibited development has to be taken 
into account (see ch. VII). Eggs shortly after oviposition exposed to 18” C. had not hatched 
after 21 days, but did so almost at once when placed at 28” C. In the case of those eggs 
placed at 7” C. not only was development entirely inhibited so that after 21 days no 
developmental changes beyond those seen when the eggs were first taken, but the eggs 
failed to hatch after 5 days at 28” C., that is exposure for 21 days had not only stopped 
development but had killed the eggs. This is in keeping with the observations of Davis 
that 10” C. has a very deleterious effect on fresh eggs. It was thought that about 15” C. 
150 
VIABILITY 
might provisionally be taken below which no development takes place in the egg. These 
results are of interest in relation to the limits of distribution of the species; see chapter II, 
section (d) on temperature in relation to limits of distribution. 
EFFECT OF SALT AND CHEMICALS 
Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond found that eggs of A. aegypti on one-sixth seawater 
hatched in four days, as also on one-fifth seawater (about O-6 per cent salt). With one-third 
seawater (about 1-O per cent salt) eggs were killed. Macfie (1915) notes that on 2 per cent 
salt eggs of A. aegypti do not blacken but remain soft and white. Eggs not only failed to 
hatch out on 2.3 per cent salt but failed to do so later, that is they were killed. 
Owing to their impervious endochorion, once this has become hard and waterproofed 
eggs of A. aegypti are resistant up to a point in such substances as alcohol (Barber, 1927) ; 
lysol (Atkin and Bacot, 1917, and others) ; hexyl resorcinol (Hinman, 1932) ; mercuric 
chloride (Trager, 1937); formalin and indeed most other chemicals for a short exposure, 
a fact which enables the substances noted above to be used for the production of sterile 
larvae (see next section). Eggs bleached with diaphanol sufficiently to show the larval 
ocelli and egg-breaker through the membranes are not by such treatment prevented from 
hatching (see p. 158). 
Powers and Headlee (1939) found various mineral oils lethal to eggs of A. aegypti. The 
effect was most pronounced at a certain viscosity, being slight with very low viscosity oils 
(under 40), reaching a peak at about 108, and falling gradually to viscosities of 300 or more. 
No penetration of the chorion, as shown by use of oils with oil-soluble dyes, occurred, nor 
was any chemical change in the endochorion to be detected. As a result of observations on 
effect of exposing eggs to nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen gas the authors conclude that the 
lethal effect of oils was due to oxygen deprivation, those oils whose physical characters 
best allowed of forming a closely investing layer on the egg being the most effective. Eggs 
subjected to pure nitrogen for 24 hours were largely killed (81-96 per cent). Hydrogen was 
fatal in 6 days. CO2 killed 50 per cent of eggs in 24 hours. 
STERILISATION OF VIABLE EGGS 
Sterilisation of the eggs of A. aegypti as a means of obtaining sterile larvae that can be 
cultured in sterile media has become an important technique in nutritional and other 
studies. The first authors to carry out observations in this connection were Atkin and 
Bacot (19 17). Eggs after being washed with a fine jet of tap water in a deep pan were 
pipetted into 05 per cent lysol, vigorously washed with the jet, transferred after a few 
minutes to 2 per cent lysol for 5-10 minutes and again washed in boiled water. 
Barber (1927) dripped 80 per cent alcohol for 2-3 minutes over eggs distributed on a piece 
of sterile cloth laid on a perforated spoon. The cloth was dried as quickly as possible by 
draining alcohol away with a wad of sterile asbestos wool placed under the spoon for a few 
seconds. The cloth was then lifted off with sterile forceps, the alcohol burned away from 
the spoon and the warmth of this used to assist in drying the cloth held at a safe distance 
above it. Eggs were transferred to the tube with a fine sterile spatula moistened with sterile 
fluid. The same method was successful with Anopheles eggs. MacGregor (1929) reared 
larvae on sterile standard bread using soap to sterilise the eggs (see under ‘Trager ‘, p. 152). 
151 
THE EGG 
Roubaud and Colas-Belcour (1929) sterilised eggs using hydrogen peroxide and also 
mercuric chloride. Hinman (1930) used chlorinated lime, but later, 1932, thoroughly 
disinfected in hexyl resorcol. Trager (1935), in cultivating mosquito larvae free from living 
organisms, used a modification of MacGregor’s method. Boats made of cover-slips by 
heating the edges in the flame and sterilising by dry heat were placed in small sterile petri 
dishes containing 5 per cent solution of Castile soap. Ten to forty eggs were placed in each 
boat and left in soap solution 5-7 minutes. After being drained of excess fluid they were 
then transferred to 80 per cent alcohol for 15-17 minutes and thence to a sterile petri dish 
of distilled water. Finally boats were dropped into a tube of culture medium. One hundred 
per cent were successful so long as eggs had been laid recently (within l-3 days) on filter 
paper half immersed in distilled water. Later the same author (1937) used 15 minutes 
immersion of eggs in White’s solution (see below). 
The sterilising fluid most frequently used is that recommended by White (193 1) for 
sterilisation of blowfly eggs (Trager, 1937 ; De Meillon, Golberg and Lavoipierre, 1945. 
and others). The following is the composition of the fluid: 
Mercuric chloride 0.25 g. 
Sodium chloride 6.5 g. 
Hydrochloric acid 1.25 C.C. 
Ethyl alcohol 250.0 C.C. 
Distilled water 750.0 C.C. 
The technique used by De Meillon, Golberg and Lavoipierre is as follows. Gravid 
females were confined singly in sterile test tubes with 2-3 C.C. sterile distilled water in an 
incubator at 28” C. When oviposition had taken place the water was removed with a sterile 
pipette and the eggs left stranded. The tubes were then half filled with White’s solution and 
left 15 minutes. The fluid was then removed, the eggs washed several times in distilled 
water using a sterile pipette to remove the water. In the final wash eggs were dislodged 
with a platinum loop, poured into a sterile petri dish and covered. Five or more eggs were 
removed at a time to tubes containing agglutinating broth and stored at 37” C. On about 
the third day hatching begins. Larvae do not grow in agglutinating broth but remain alive 
for several days. There is no difference in the ultimate growth whether such larvae when 
used are 12, 24 or 96 hours old. 
An account of various methods that have been used in preparing sterile blowfly eggs for 
surgical use are discussed by Simmons (1934) with a bibliography. This author found that 
mercuric chloride with phenol, as also formalin alone, caused agglutination of the eggs; 
5 per cent formalin with 1 per cent NaOH for 5 minutes was, however, an excellent steri- 
lising fluid. White found sodium hydroxide followed by 5 per cent formalin for 15 minutes 
a satisfactory disinfectant for blowfly eggs. A device described for storage of blowfly eggs 
by White (Simmons) is a jar with a cap (like a canada balsam bottle) with a Gooch crucible 
fixed in the neck on which sterile gauze with eggs can be placed after disinfection. About 
50 C.C. of sterile water is poured slowly over the eggs to remove disinfectant. 
It is obvious that a tube into which a mosquito, bred in the ordinary way, has been 
introduced is no longer sterile. It would be quite possible, however, if thought necessary, 
without much trouble, to perform the whole process under sterile conditions. The pupa 
of A&!es aegypti is extremely resistant to chemicals and will live for a considerable time in 
say 80 per cent alcohol and especially so in more watery solutions of such a substance as 
152 
VIABILITY 
mercuric chloride. A disinfected pupa could be washed and placed in a sterile tube with a 
gauze top to hatch out and could be fed on a sterile skin through this and allowed to oviposit 
all under sterile conditions. 
(f) PHYSIOLOGY OF THE EGG 
Very little is recorded specifically in the literature regarding physiology of the egg of 
A. aegypti other than in respect to influences affecting hatching which will be dealt with in 
the next chapter. Much of what is known of the physiology of insect eggs in general, of 
which a short account is given by Wigglesworth (1942) in the first chapter of his Principles 
of Insect Physiology and later communications by Pryor, Beament and others, will no doubt 
relate also to the eggs of A. aegypti. There are certain points, however, which are of special 
interest in the present case. These are: (1) the chemical nature of the egg membranes, 
(2) the nature of the waterproofing of the egg to enable it to resist desiccation to such a 
marked extent as it does in respect to some other mosquito eggs, and (3) its oxygen 
requirements. 
CHEMICAL NATURE OF THE EGG MEMBRANE 
The chorion of the insect egg is often spoken of as though it were a homogenous structure. 
Actually, as shown by Beament (1946), it may be extremely complex. In the case of 
A. aegypti the two portions described as exo- and endo-chorion are clearly of very different 
nature. Whilst the former, especially in the fresh moist egg, is very delicate, soft and readily 
detached, acted upon by hot KOH and by various solvents, the latter, besides being 
remarkably tough, is resistant alike to strong acids, hot KOH and solvents. 
The exochorion consists of two distinct elements, the matrix forming the membrane and 
the chorionic bodies and pegs, seemingly o’f similar nature, which are embedded in it. 
Though somewhat resistant to action of KOH in the cold, the matrix completely dis- 
appears after 15 minutes’ exposure to sat. KOH at 160” C. and is therefore not chitin. 
Detached fragments and egg-shells with the exochorion in situ treated overnight with 
cont. H,SO, or HCl show the matrix still intact with the chorionic bodies embedded in it. 
It is eventually, however, destroyed by cont. H,SO, in the cold, but requires one or two 
weeks for this. In cont. HNO, the exochorion is quickly destroyed. 
In solvents the matrix commonly swells and becomes more or less disorganised. Treated 
with ether it becomes after a time fragmented and leaves the egg largely bare. Chloroform 
causes swelling of the matrix and its detachment. The most marked and curious effects by 
a solvent is given by acetone, which causes the exochorion to become markedly swollen 
and opaque with the chorionic bodies projecting beyond its surface. It has already been 
noted that water causes the exochorion of the under surface of the egg to swell and become 
gelatinous. The upper surface is not so affected. 
When dried, as when left as a flake after a dry egg has been detached, the substance of 
the exochorion (chorionic pad) appears to become altered as it no longer swells up in 
water and is more resistant to solvents, but it is dissolved in strong KOH overnight and 
eggs cemented by it become detached. 
The chorionic bodies are noticeable for their transparency and absence of colouring 
matter. They are resistant to most reagents including cont. H,S04 and HCl. In such acids 
they become very visible in the clear matrix and seem to become somewhat swollen showing 
153 
THE EGG 
a sago or cauliflower effect. It is possible that they swell somewhat in water appearing 
9-l 1 r_~ in a dry state and 12-13 p after 30 minutes in water. They stain with methylene blue 
and more readily with eosin especially in sections. They stain deeply and selectively with 
watery thionin. In general the reactions of the chorionic bodies indicate that they are of 
untanned protein nature and they stain pink with Millon’s reaction. Unfortunately, except 
that the whole exochorion disappeared after heating for 15 minutes in sat. KOH at 
160” C. the effect on the chorionic bodies was not further investigated. The exochorion 
appears to play no part in waterproofing the egg, as eggs that have been largely deprived 
of the exochorion are still resistant to desiccation. What function, if any, the chorionic 
bodies subserve is unknown, but they seem to be associated with eggs that are resistant to 
desiccation and they may play some role in this respect or in subsequent stimulus to 
hatching when eventually submerged. 
The endochorion microscopically consists, in the greater part of its thickness at least, of 
a uniform very dark and tough layer. That it is not chitin is shown by the fact that though 
it resists heating for 15 minutes to 160” C. in sat. KOH, it does not after such treatment 
show any indication of dissolving in 3 per cent acetic. It seems certain that it is a tanned 
protein as shown by Pryor (1940), for the hardened larval skin of the Calliphora pupa and 
by Beament (1946) for the resistant endochorion layer of the Rhodnius egg. In support of 
such a view is the fact that if the newly laid (white) egg be placed in water with some 
crystals of pyrocatechol the endochorion becomes a beautiful pink indicating the presence 
of polyphenolase, the ferment concerned in the tanning of protein in insect cuticle. In 
bleached egg-shells treated with Millon’s reagent there is some darkening and a distinct red 
tinge where the egg-shell is broken and the edge turned up. At the suggestion of Dr Pryor 
a quantity of egg-shells were submitted for determination of the sulphur content. Only 
a very small sulphur content was found, indicating that sulphur was not an important 
constituent of the endochorion. . 
Some interest attaches to the colour exhibited during the process of darkening (tanning) 
of the endochorion. As previously noted in Ai;des aegypti egg, this is a distinct blue. In 
Culex molestus, as I have previously noted (Christophers, 1945), it is green. Herms and 
Freeborn (1921) describe the egg of Anophelespunctipennis as at first pearly white becoming 
progressively yellowish and then darker. At 35 minutes it is leaden, at 45 dull black and 
under the microscope a rich chitinous brown. Blue and green I am informed by Dr Pryor 
are unusual, the most common colour developing in insect cuticle being yellow or brown. 
WATERPROOFING OF THE EGG 
Though the endochorion consists of a very hard and tough material this does not suffice 
to waterproof the egg, since as already noted the endochorion has become fully darkened 
in 24 hours without the egg being prevented from collapsing from desiccation in a short 
time, whereas after some three days the egg resists desiccation for months. Wigglesworth 
(1945) has shown that the waterproofing of insect cuticle is commonly brought about by 
a thin layer of wax, in which case the insect at a critical temperature, depending upon the 
point at which the wax layer is disorganised, suddenly ceases to resist desiccation and, as 
shown by loss of weight, rapidly loses water. Similarly in the egg of Rhodnius water- 
proofing is by waxy layers, the critical temperature at which desiccation becomes rapid 
being 42.5” C. (Beament, 1946). In the case of different species of tick Lees (1946) found this 
PHYSIOLOGY 
critical point ranged from 32” to 75” C., those species which are normally more resistant 
to desiccation having the higher critical temperatures. Another way of determining the 
critical temperature is by heating in a strong solution of salt. On disorganisation of the 
waxy layer osmosis, now possible, causes collapse of the egg. Acdes aegypti eggs heated 
to 50” C. for 24 hours in sat. NaCl showed no change, whereas heated to 55.5” C. collapse 
in every case took place within 2 hours. The critical temperature lay therefore in this case 
between 50 and 55.5” C., and it is probable that the waterproofing of the A. aegypti egg 
is by a waxy layer, the position of which, however, has not been determined. 
OXYGEN REQUIREMENTS OF THE EGG 
It is probable from what is known of respiration of insects in general that, expecially during 
the period of development of the primary larva, a certain oxygen requirement is necessary. 
Powers and Headlee (1939) have shown that eggs coated with certain oils are killed and 
ascribe this effect to deprivation of 02, the maximum effect being produced by those oils 
which give the most complete coating. It is of interest in this connection to consider the 
function of the air channels in the chorion. In the dry condition of the egg it would seem 
that these channels, lying outside the dense endochorion, could have little usefulness in 
supplying oxygen. But during the early stages of development and when the egg is wet and 
the parts soft, such channels may well have a functional role to play, either in respect to 
hardening of the endochorion or development of the embryo or both these processes. 
In regard to the latter this may explain some of the apparent anomalies connected with 
such questions as rate of development and hatching under different conditions. Thus 
Shannon and Putnam (1934) note that eggs freshly deposited less than 12 hours old if 
placed immediately in water containing food do not undergo as rapid or as uniform de- 
velopment as those kept in open air on moist filter paper. Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) 
refer to eggs perishing which have been submerged shortly after laying. Mature eggs from 
the ovary and white eggs sunk in fluid may or may not darken. In the latter case they swell 
only to a moderate extent, fail to hatch, and after remaining in the fluid some days collapse 
from desiccation on removal. 
When the primary larva is in a state of diapause the need for 0, is almost certainly less 
marked. In testing for lethal effect by oils, etc., it may therefore be important to state at 
what stage the eggs used have been taken. 
If the views of certain authors as to the effect of reduced oxygen in bringing about 
hatching be correct (see under next chapter) such reduction must in some way be capable 
of making itself felt through the extremely impervious egg membranes. It is not known 
how this could be brought about. 
REFERENCES 
ATKIN, E. A. and BACOT, A. W. (1917). The relation between the hatching of the egg and the 
development of the larva of Stegomyia fasciata and the presence of bacteria and yeasts. 
Parasitology, 9, 482-536. 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). Report of the entomological investigation undertaken for the Commission 
for the year 1914-15. Rep. Yell. I;ev. Comm. 3, 1-191. 
BACOT, A. W. (1917). The effect of the presence of bacteria or yeasts on the hatching of eggs of 
Stegomyia fasciata (the yellow fever mosquito). Summary. J. R. A4icr. Sot. 3, 173-4. 
155 
THE EGG 
BACOT, A. W. (1918). A note on the period during which the eggs of Stegomyia fasciata (Aedes 
calopus) from Sierra Leone stock retain their vitality in a humid temperature. Parasitology, 
10,280-3. 
BARBER, M. A. (1927). The food of anopheline larvae. Food organisms in pure culture. Publ. 
Hlth Rep. Wash. 42, 1494-510. 
BEAMENT, J. W. L. (1946). The waterproofing process in eggs of Rhodnius prolixus Stahe. Proc. 
Roy. Sot. B, 133, 407-18. 
BODINE, J. H. and ROBBIE, W. A. (1943). Physiological characteristics of the diapause grass- 
hopper egg. 2. Changes in density and weight during development. Physiol. 2002. 16, 279. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BOYCE, R. (1911). The prevalence, distribution and significance of Stegomyia fasciata (calopus 
Mg.) in West Africa. Bull. Ent. Res. 1, 233-63. 
BRESSLAU, E. (1920). Eier und Eizahn der einheimischen Stechmiicken. Biol. Zbl. 40, 337-55. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1927). Researches in Polynesia and Melanesia. Parts 
I-IV. Mem. Lond. Sch. Hyg. Trop. Med. Mem. 1. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1945). Structure of the Culex egg and egg-raft in relation to function 
(Diptera). Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 95, 25-34. 
COOLING, L. E. (1924). On the protracted viability of eggs of Aedes aegypti and A. motoscriptus 
in a desiccated condition in a state of nature. Health, 2, 51-2. 
CRAIG, G. B. JR. (1955). Preparation of the chorion of eggs of Aedine mosquitoes for microscopy. 
Mosquito News, 15, 228-31. 
DAVIS, N. C. (1932). The effects of heat and cold upon Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti. Amer. J. Hyg. 
16, 177-91. 
DE BUCK, A. (1938). Das Exochorion der Stegomyiaeier. Proc. K. Akad. Wet. 41, 677-83. 
DE MEILLON, B., GOLBERG, L. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. (1945). The nutrition of the larva of Aedes 
aegypti L. J. Exp. Biol. 21, 84-9. 
FIELDING, J. W. (1919). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata. Part I. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 13, 259-96. 
FINLAY, C. (1886). Yellow fever transmission by means of the Culex mosquito. Amer. J. Med. Sci. 
92, 395-409. 
FRANCIS, E. (1907). Observations on the life cycle of Stegomyia calopus. Publ. Hlth Rep. 
Wash. 22, 381-3. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). OS mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Paris. 
HERMS, W. B. and FREEBORN, S. B. (1921). The egg laying habits of Californian anophelines. 
J. Parasit. 7, 69-79. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1930). A study of the food of mosquito larvae (Culicidae). Amer. J. Hyg. 12, 
238-70. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1932). The presence of bacteria within the eggs of mosquitoes. Science, 76, 
106-7. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
JAMES, S. P. (1922). Exhibit of eggs of culicine mosquitoes found in England. Trans. R. Sot. Trap. 
Med. Hyg. 16, 267-9. 
JAMES, S. P. (1923). Eggs of Fjnlaya geniculata and other English mosquitoes illuminated with the 
aid of Lieberkuhn reflectors. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 17, 8-9. 
JOHNSON, C. G. (1937). The absorption of water and the associated volume changes occurring in 
the eggs of Notostira erratica L. etc. J. Exp. Biol. 14, 413-21. 
JOHNSON, H. A. (1937). Note on the continuous rearing of Ai;des aegypti in the laboratory. Publ. 
Hlth Rep. Wash. 52, 1177-g. 
LEES, A. D. (1946). Transpiration and the structure of the epicuticle in ticks. J. Exp. Biol. 23, 
379-410. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1915). Observations on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 6, 
205-29. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1920). Heat and Stegomyia fasciata, short exposures to raised temperatures. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 14, 73-82. 
156 
REFERENCES 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1916). Resistance of the eggs of Stegomyia fasciata (Ai;des calopus) to 
conditions adverse to development. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 81-5. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1929). The significance of pH in the development of mosquito larvae. 
Parasitology, 21, 132-57. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.). London. 
MITCHELL, E. G. (1907). Mosquito Life. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London. 
NEWSTEAD, H. and THOMAS, H. W. (1910). The mosquitoes of the Amazon Region. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 4, 141-50. 
NICHOLSON, A. J. (1921). The development of the ovary and ovarian egg of a mosquito, Anopheles 
maculipennis Meigen. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 65, 395-448. 
O’CONNOR, F. W. (1923). Researches in the Western Pacific. Res. Mem. Lond. Sch. Trop. Med. 4. 
OTTO, M. and NEUMANN, R. 0. (1905). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
PARKER, H. B., BEYER, G. E. and POTHIER, 0. L. (1903). A study of aetiology of yellow fever. 
Yell. Fev. Inst. Bull. 13 (Publ. Hlth Marine Hosp. Serv.), 21-7. 
PERYASSU, A. G. (1908). 0s culicideos do Brazil. Typog. Leuzinger, Rio de Janeiro. 
POWERS, G. E. and HEADLEE, T. J. (1939). How petroleum oil kills certain mosquito eggs. J. Econ. 
Ent. 32, 219-22. 
PRYOR, M. G. M. (1940). On the hardening of the cuticle of insects. Proc. Roy. Sot. B, 128, 
393407. 
ROBERTSON, T. B. (1918). The Physical Chemistry of the Proteins. Longmans Green and Co., 
London and New York. 
ROUBAUD, E. (1927). L’&losion de l’oeuf et les stimulants d’kclosion chez le Stegomyia de la 
fi&vre jaune etc. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 184, 1491-2. 
ROUBAUD, E. (1929). Recherches biologiques sur le moustique de la fikvre jaune A@des argenteus 
Poiret. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 43, 1093-1209. 
ROUBAUD, E. and COLAS-BELCOUR, J. (1929). Action des diastases et des facteurs microbiens sur 
l’&losion des ceufs durable du moustique de la fi&vre jaune. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 43, 644-55. 
ROY, D. N. (1940). A study of the bionomics of Anopheles subpictus and A. annularis. J. Mal. Inst. 
India, 3, 499-507. 
ROY, D. N. and MAJUNDAR, S. P. (1939). On mating and egg formation in Culex fatigans Wied. 
J. Mal. Inst. India, 2, 245-51. 
SHANNON, R. C. and PUTNAM, P. (1934). See references in ch. v (a-g), p. 128. 
SIMMONS, S. W. (1934). Sterilization of blowfly eggs, etc. Amer. J. Surg. 25, 140-7. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901). Monog. of the Culicidae, 1, 2 1. 
TRAGER, W. (1935). The culture of mosquito larvae free from living micro-organisms. Amer. J. 
Hyg. 22, 18-25. 
TRAGER, W. (1937). A growth factor required by mosquito larvae. J. Exp. Biol. 14, 240-51. 
VISHNA NATH (1924). The egg follicle of Culex. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 69, 151-75. 
WHITE, G. F. (1931). Production of sterile maggots for surgical use. J. Parasit. 18, 133. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2. Methuen and Co. 
(See also many subsequent editions.) 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1945). Transpiration through the cuticle of insects. J. Exp. Biol. 21, 97- 
114. 
YOUNG, C. J. (1922). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia calopus Meig. in Brazil. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 16, 389-406. 
=57 
VII 
ECLOSION 
(a) THE ACT OF HATCHING 
No detailed account of the hatching of the egg of A&?e,s aegypti appears to have been given 
in the literature. Whilst, therefore, there is still much to be investigated as to the physio- 
logical processes involved, a brief account of the act as seen under the microscope will not 
here be out of place. 
As already noted, eggs are normally oviposited and cemented in situ with the ventral or 
flatter surface uppermost in respect to the object on which they are laid. The larva in the 
egg occupies a position in accordance with the naming of the surfaces here given, that is with 
its ventral aspect upwards. Since the line of fracture which forms the egg-cap passes 
further caudal on the ventral than on the dorsal aspect of the egg, it follows that the opening 
made by detachment of the cap faces obliquely upwards so that looking at eggs that have 
hatched still cemented in situ all the openings to some extent face the observer. Actually 
there seems to be no difficulty in hatching should the egg by any chance not be in this 
position or detached and lying loose in the fluid. It is useful to remember, too, that since 
the crack forming the egg-cap starts on the dorsal aspect, this is the aspect that should be 
in view if early stages in hatching are to be observed. 
The whole process is best watched using the following technique. Eggs from a fragment 
of pot with massive deposit of non-shrunken mature eggs that are known to hatch shortly 
after submersion are brushed off into a watch-glass with a fine camel-hair brush, a little 
hatching fluid added and the eggs rapidly squished in and out with a pipette and teat to 
ensure that a sufficient number will be sunk in the fluid. Seeing that there are such a 
number, the watch-glass is moved with a rotatory movement which brings the scattered 
sunken eggs together in a little heap in the middle. Pipette a suitable number of these on to 
a hollow-ground slide and add hatching fluid until on sliding a 13 by 4 in. cover-glass along 
the slide and over the cavity no air bubble is left. Any moderate excess pushed before the 
cover-glass will serve as an extra reserve of fluid. If this be done as described the eggs will 
not be disturbed or moved. Observe under a strong illumination by reflected light, keeping 
under observation such eggs as have their dorsal surface upwards and the anterior portion 
of this surface well illuminated. A lamp giving a bright beam of light is very suitable and 
a warm stage helps, though it is not essential if the room temperature is reasonably warm. 
It is advisable to use as hatching fluid some undiluted old culture fluid as the evolution 
of bubbles of oxygen when tap water is warmed is otherwise troublesome. If it is desired 
to bleach the eggs, they should be covered in the first place with 1 in 5 diaphanol in distilled 
water for 15 minutes or until at least some eggs show eye-spots and then transferred for 
a few moments to 1 in 1000 NaOH and thence to tap water. They should be sunk in the 
diaphanol with a pipette and teat as described above and any egg that is not easily wetted 
and sinking may be neglected. Select eggs for watching with the egg-breaker well displayed 
(Fig. 7 (1)). 
158 
THE ACT OF HATCHING 
The first indication of hatching is the appearance of a slowly widening transverse crack 
in the egg-shell towards the anterior end of the dorsal aspect of the egg. In the bleached 
egg on one or two occasions an appearance was seen as if the sharp point of the egg- 
breaker had previously penetrated the shell, but this requires confirmation. The slit widens 
slowly and evenly showing in sharp contrast the pale larval tissue. It extends fairly quickly 
round the egg bringing into view the egg-breaker and, laterally, the two conspicuous dark 
eye-spots or larval ocelli (Fig. 7 (2)). Active pulsatile movements are now seen within the 
head as this begins to be exposed, due most probably to muscular movements of the 
pharynx. Soon it is evident that a cap-like portion of the egg-shell is being pushed off. 
In a few seconds the bulging head, advancing steadily, pushes the cap before it still attached 
ventrally so that it is opening like the lid of a box. During this process the cap is firmly 
impacted like a muzzle over the front of the head up to about the level of the egg-breaker 
and ocelli. Finally, as the head bulges more and more, the egg-cap, now forced ventrally 
almost at right angles to the egg axis, is suddenly freed by breaking of the ventral con- 
nection and the head with the cap perched on it is rapidly extruded followed by the thorax 
in a tumultuous-like movement of the soft parts and later by the foremost segments of the 
abdomen. The appearance in fact is as if some force from behind had pushed the larval 
parts out from the egg-shell. After a short pause a rapid movement of the now largely free 
body liberates the larva from the shell and usually detaches the egg-cap from the head. The 
larva, now with all its hairs erect, usually remains stationary for a moment or two and then 
swims off. The egg-shell is left as an empty case. Within it when decolorised can be seen a thin 
loosely attached lining membrane, broken across like the egg-shell itself, the amnion-serosa. 
The larva, however, is not yet in a position to take on its normal functions, for it is not 
until an hour or more from hatching that the head swells from its triangular to a globular 
shape and the feeding brushes are liberated. 
The above is a description of hatching as may be observed in the case of mature eggs 
submerged in water or other medium. Mention should, however, be made of the appearance 
seen when hatching occurs under the influence of strong chemicals such as sodium hypo- 
chlorite or diaphanol. In this case the larva is usually dead, extruded from the egg with the 
caudal extremity still lying within the egg-shell. The abdominal segments, closely packed 
together in the egg, are now widely separated with intersegmental notches. The brushes are 
expanded and free and the egg-cap is almost always still attached to the egg-shell ven- 
trally (Fig. 7 (6)). It is generally assumed that the chemical has led to the hatching of the 
live larva, but that this has been killed on emerging. The nature of such hatching is dealt 
with later. 
(b) MECHANISM OF HATCHING 
In the egg ripe for hatching the fully developed primary larva lies ventral aspect upwards. 
The head occupies about the anterior third of the egg and almost another third at the 
posterior end is taken up by the siphon and anal segment with its papillae. In the inter- 
mediate portion are the three thoracic and the remaining seven abdominal segments 
flattened like coins in a rouleau and showing no indication of constrictions between the 
segments. The long lateral hairs lie directed forwards along the length of the egg, except the 
prothoracic hairs which are directed backwards. In the mid-line dorsally towards the 
anterior end of the egg is the egg-breaker and laterally and a little behind its level are the 
black pigmented ocelli (Fig. 7 (1)). 
I59 
ECLOSION 
The egg-breaker in shape and appearance is not unlike a thorn in a young rose shoot, 
except that it is not curved. It consists of a heavily sclerotised circular plaque which rises 
conically in the middle to an extremely sharp point (Fig. 7 (4)). Posteriorly the plaque is 
continued backwards as a rod-shaped extension giving to the whole rather the appearance 
of a tennis racquet. The hard and thick plaque lies in a circular depression on the dorsum 
of the head and is surrounded by soft membrane which forms the floor of the fossa 
(Fig. 7 (5)). It seems clear from the structure that the plaque carrying the conical spine, 
whilst normally it lies at rest depressed in the hollow and so inoperative, if forced upwards 
would bring the very sharp point of the spine against the endochorion. 
The most obvious way by which the spine of the egg-breaker could be so protruded 
would seem to be by intracranial pressure and though, as noted by Bresslau (1920) there is 
a muscle inserted into the plaque (the inner retractors of theflabella or feeding brushes) 
it is difficult to see how this could cause protrusion of the spine unless, acting along with 
intracranial pressure, it served to draw the spine forwards at the same time as it was 
protruded. There is just another possibility, namely that these muscles are inserted into 
the plaque as the only rigid place of origin, the cuticle of the head otherwise being notice- 
ably very soft. It is important that the feeding brushes which at hatching are still folded 
in the head should be everted and the muscles in question may be more related to this 
function than to forcing out the spine of the egg-breaker. 
Further points regarding the mechanism of hatching may most readily be given as 
answers to the following questions, namely, (1) How does the larva use the egg-breaker to 
cut the cap ? (2) Does the larva swallow water to increase its bulk when forcing off the 
egg-cap ? and (3) How is final escape from the egg brought about? 
HOW DOES THE EGG-BREAKER WORK? 
It had previously been assumed by the author that the egg-cap in mosquitoes was cut by 
the egg-breaker and that the only way that this could be done was by rotation of the head 
of the larva. In favour of this is the fact that there is no indication in the unhatched egg of 
Figure 7. Eclosion. 
Dorsal view of bleached egg showing fully developed primary larva. 
Lateral view of egg showing first indication of hatching. Note the egg-breaker and larval 
ocellus showing in the fissure. 
Larva killed in the egg and extracted. Diaphanol specimen. 
Lateral view of egg-breaker. Anterior direction is on the left. The line across the drawing 
shows the level of the general surface of the dorsum of the head. 
Dorsal view of head of newly emerged larva showing the egg-breaker set in a membranous 
depression and the bent antennae. 
Larva ‘hatched’ in diaphanol. Note extrusion of brushes though the head is as yet not 
swollen. Only the upper portions of the egg-shell have been shaded to enable position and 
appearance of the larval abdomen to be seen. 
Larva immediately after hatching from the egg. Note expansion of the abdomen and general 
increase in size and length of the larva. An egg drawn at the same time and scale is shown at 
its side. 
Head of larva 2 hours after hatching. Same scale as no. 7. 
Ventral view of head of larva hatched in suspension of Indian ink. Note blackening of brushes, 
palatum and mandibles. 
160 
Olmm. I 
I 1 
PO1 mm. I 4 
@l mm. 
II @l mm. 1 I O-1 mm. 
@l mm. 
1 O-1 mm. , 
Figure 7 
161 
ECLOSION 
any line of weakness corresponding to the line of detachment of the cap and that in 
Anopheles we know that the larva has the power of rotating the head through as much as 
180”. Further, in the case of a mycetophylid (Bolitophila) Edwards (1919) notes that the 
young larva can be observed moving its head up and down and cutting or scratching a slit 
in the shell. In order to ascertain how the egg-breaker in A&ks aegypti worked, hatching 
has been observed in eggs bleached with diaphanol to the point where the shell is sufficiently 
decolorised to allow the larval ocelli and egg-breaker to be seen, a process which evidently 
had no harmful effect since the larvae escaped from the egg in living condition and 
seemingly in no way affected. In such preparations movement of the head would be at 
once evident, but no movement of the egg-breaker preparatory to or during formation of 
the egg-cap break has ever been seen. All that was seen was that just before the crack 
started there was an appearance resembling a thin layer of air passing up to the point of the 
egg-breaker spine. This, however, was found to be due to reflection of light from the very 
smooth enamel or china-like surface of the egg-breaker at this time. On some occasions it 
was thought that the point of the spine had been observed to pass through the endo- 
chorion, but this requires confirmation. Following the appearance described above a slit 
appeared at the site of the spine point and passed rapidly round the egg. The spine made no 
movement. 
Since the egg-breaker does not appear to be rotated from its median position during 
formation of the egg-cap the only conclusions possible seem to be, (1) that the egg-cap is 
cut some time previous to hatching, (2) that the egg-breaker besides merely perforating the 
endochorion starts a crack in a particular direction which is followed up by further 
splitting caused by pressure, or (3) the endochorion under pressure breaks in the way it 
does once it has been punctured. 
Bringing pressure to bear upon eggs in various ways showed that a cap was only to be 
detached in eggs that were fully ready to hatch, that is those with a conspicuous and pre- 
sumably fully developed egg-breaker. Eggs that were in this condition when pressed with a 
needle could usually be made to release an egg-cap in a manner that could almost be 
described as a ‘ pop ‘. Further, examination of the endochorion when larvae were extracted 
through the posterior end of the egg showed no indication of any previously cut or marked 
line. It was therefore concluded that mechanical pressure alone could force off an egg-cap 
once the egg-breaker was fully developed and that natural hatching was possible without 
any cutting action. It has previously been noted that the endochorion when ruptured by 
internal pressure (exploded eggs) breaks into longitudinal strips. Nevertheless, it was noted 
that by crushing eggs some transverse breaking of the endochorion also tended to occur, 
fragments to a large extent being rectangular in shape showing that this structure had some 
tendency to split transversely as well as longitudinally. 
Seeing that splitting of the endochorion appeared to be started in a fixed direction as a 
result of perforation by the egg-breaker spine, it was thought that the spine might have 
a chisel-shaped point, but no evidence of this could be found. Later it was interesting to 
find that Marshall (1938) in his book The British Mosquitoes states that the point of the 
egg-breaker in the British species other than those of the genus AFdes is chisel-shaped, but 
that in all species of Ai;des it is round. 
It therefore seems most probable that the egg-breaker in AL;des aegypti acts merely by 
puncturing the endochorion and that pressure then is able to start a crack which under 
continued pressure of the swollen head front is led round the egg in a relatively fixed 
162 
THE MECHANISM OF HATCHING 
course. In other words, the structure and forces being the same, what is likely to happen 
in one egg is likely to happen in all. In favour of this view is the fact that though the cap is 
roughly equivalent in different eggs its cutting is far from being meticulously accurate as it 
might be expected to be if prepared and carried out by some more precise method of 
detachment. 
It may be mentioned here in relation to hatching that where eggs have been kept rather 
wet a certain number may be found with the egg-cap already cut, though the larva has not 
hatched and often the crack is so narrow as to be easily overlooked. Should the surface 
on which the eggs are lying then become dry the larva dries and perishes, a fact later 
sometimes made apparent by a little tuft of mould growing at the crack. Where, however, 
eggs have been kept in a just critical state of dampness it is possible such larvae may 
survive, a fact which it is thought may account for the almost immediate hatching of larvae 
in some cases when eggs are submerged. This, however, requires confirmation. 
DOES THE LARVA SWALLOW WATER DURING ECLOSION? 
That there is some active movement within the head when this is first exposed in the 
widening crack in the egg-shell has already been referred to and ascribed to the move- 
ments of the pharynx in the swallowing of fluid. That insects in hatching swallow amniotic 
fluid and later air to cause increase in volume is well established (Sikes and Wigglesworth, 
1931). Seemingly the Ai;des larval head occupies the whole available space in the anterior 
portion of the egg, the clear transparent area in front of the darker area formed by the 
mouth-parts and other structures as seen in the bleached egg being occupied, not by 
amniotic fluid, but by the swollen clypeal region of the larval head, that part in fact which 
later is seen covered by the dislodged cap. Further, the swallowing movements appear most 
active when the head is slowly bulging forward against the separating egg-cap. It seemed 
probable therefore that the insect at this time is swallowing water from the outside 
medium. 
To ascertain whether this was actually so eggs were allowed to hatch in weak suspensions 
of Indian ink. Under such conditions, whether as a result of toxicity of the suspension, or 
by the blocking effect to be described, practically all larvae died in various stages of 
escape from the egg and most usually with the cap still firmly impacted over the front 
swollen portion of the head as previously described, that is, covering the parts just up to 
the level of the egg-breaker and ocelli (Fig. 7 (2)). At this stage the larval head is unex- 
panded and triangular in shape, the brushes and the bent down hairy labral area (epi- 
pharynx) being tucked into the pre-oral cavity as when in the later stages the larva 
‘swallows’ its brushes. Only when the head within an hour or two has swollen into a 
globular state are these organs free and everted. In larvae hatched in Indian ink suspension 
the compacted brushes with the hairy epipharynx and the bases of the mandibular hairs 
appear quite black from accumulation of the black suspended particles. No dark material 
at this stage could be detected in any part of the alimentary canal. It would seem, there- 
fore, that fluid has been taken in but filtered through the compacted brushes. In some cases 
where larvae were still alive and removed to clean water they were observed attempting 
to comb out the brushes with the mandibular combs which at this stage are relatively very 
large and conspicuous. In time some succeeded in clearing the obstruction with the brushes 
still impacted and particles of the ink were then seen in the proventriculus or lower down 
163 II-2 
ECLOSION 
the alimentary canal. It was clear that active imbibition of fluid had taken place before 
the larva had left the egg, but not clear whether such imbibition had occurred in the earlier 
stages when the cap was first being pushed off. 
Since particulate matter was thus prevented from entering, the effect of hatching in a 
strong solution of cochineal was tried. This stain was used by Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) 
for testing food choice by the adult and was found very suitable for the present purpose. 
The solution, made up by a dispensing chemist, was presumably an alcoholic tincture, but 
it did not prevent hatching in a 1 to 4 dilution. Larvae pipetted out as rapidly as possible 
as they hatched into water heated to 80” C. invariably showed the alimentary canal from 
behind the thorax to the seventh abdominal segment distended with pink fluid. The same 
condition was found in larvae which had not emerged beyond the first stage of hatching, 
that is with the cap in process of being pushed off as in Fig. 7 (2). It is certain, therefore, 
that external fluid is being swallowed during the pushing forward of the cap by the head, 
further strengthening the conclusion that the pulsatile movements seen in the head at this 
time are due to muscular movements by the pharynx. 
In a 1 to 2 dilution of the stain no larvae hatched, but a number of eggs were found in 
the stage referred to above, with the egg-cap just beginning to be displaced. These larvae 
were all dead, but on being extracted from the egg-shell they showed the broad band of 
pink colour down the abdomen indicating distension of the gut with external fluid. 
Presumably the larvae began hatching, but having reached a certain stage had swallowed 
sufficient alcohol to cause their death. This was found to be the readiest way to demon- 
strate imbibition as it is difficult to catch specimens early enough once they are seen to be 
hatching to exclude the possibility of their having taken in fluid at some later stage. By the 
above procedure eggs can be put to hatch in the stain and after a suitable interval examined 
for the above described stages. 
WHAT IS THE MECHANISM OF PROPULSION IN THE 
LATER STAGES OF HATCHING? 
When, with extension of the fissure in the egg-shell, the ventral connection of the egg-cap 
with the rest of the endochorion finally gives way, there occurs a rapid completion of the 
process of hatching almost as if the larva were being pushed out by some propelling force 
behind. This effect continues until the thorax and a part of the abdomen have left the egg- 
shell, a very similar appearance to that seen in the egg artificially hatched by diaphanol, 
fixatives, etc. From then on the act of leaving the egg is clearly only a matter of ordinary 
locomotion. Interest lies in what caused the initial extrusion. The larva whilst in the egg 
measures in length about the same as the egg, that is about O-7 mm. of which the head 
occupies a third. The abdomen and thorax occupy about one-half of the egg length and 
the abdomen alone about 0.26 mm. If the larva be killed by heat, or other means which 
coagulate it, and then extracted from the egg-shell, the abdomen is cylindrical in shape with 
smooth sides, the segments being compressed and resembling a pile of thin coins. This is 
the condition when the egg-cap has been partially pushed off. Then a few seconds later, 
when the final connection of the cap with the rest of the shell gives way, the whole ap- 
pearance of the abdomen changes so that it is now elongate with deep intersegmental 
notches. In other words it calls to mind the toy jack-in-the-box in which a figure with 
compressed spring leaps upwards when the cover of the box is opened. From measuring 
I64 
THE MECHANISM OF HATCHING 
about 0.26 mm. the abdomen now measures quite double that length and its hinder half 
still occupies most of the length of the egg-shell. 
When first hatched the larva is unable to move or use its feeding brushes. The head is 
bluntly triangular in shape and the antennae elbowed (Fig. 7 (5)). The cuticle appears to 
be very soft and that on the dorsum of the head is seen in sections to be thrown into 
wrinkles. The only sclerotised parts are the egg-breaker and the triangular mental sclerite. 
The long lateral hairs soon take up their normal position. During the first four hours the 
head, and especially the anterior portion that will become the fronto-clypeus of the later 
larval stages, swells greatly until it becomes globular (Fig. 7 (8)). During this process the 
feeding brushes are everted and begin to function. As shown by Wigglesworth (1938) no 
air is at first present in the tracheal trunks, nor has air appeared to take any part in the 
hatching process. Very shortly after hatching the young larvae seek the surface and make 
contact with the surface film. Of a number of newly hatched larvae observed at 27” C. in 
water of depth 1, 3 and 6 cm. the majority had attached themselves to the surface film in 
10 minutes in depth 1 cm. and smaller proportions at 3 and 6 cm. Further information 
regarding the first instar larva and the changes undergone after hatching will be found later 
when the different larval instars are described. 
(c) CONDITIONS AFFECTING HATCHING 
SUBMERGENCE 
A vital essential to hatching is that eggs should be submerged. It is necessary in view of 
such a statement, however, to guard against what may be a serious misunderstanding. For 
though eggs require submergence for the act of hatching, submergence before the eggs are 
ready for hatching may be fatal to them. Eggs sunk immediately after oviposition may not 
even undergo the normal processes of swelling and darkening. Even at a later stage ‘sunk 
eggs’ under some conditions may not develop and unless eggs, before being placed to 
hatch, are known to be conditioned (see p. 45) serious error may arise in interpreting their 
subsequent behaviour when placed to hatch. 
Whatever the conditions, hatching never seems to occur unless the eggs are actually 
bathed in fluid. Though eggs do not hatch in the absence of fluid, in a damp atmosphere 
they may show incomplete hatching should there be condensation. Under such circum- 
stances eggs are often found with the egg-cap wholly or partially separated. In such 
circumstances, even though the egg is wet, larvae have never been seen emerged from the 
egg-shell. If desiccation now occurs, the larvae soon die. 
Even incomplete submergence appears to be, in some degree at least, inadequate. 
Buxton and Hopkins (1927) refer to the fact that they found it advisable, to ensure 
hatching of eggs on filter paper, to sink the paper beneath the surface. It is a common 
experience to see eggs on filter paper hatch only where they have become submerged and 
remaining unhatched on the paper where it is merely wet. 
A possible instance of lack of complete submergence is the frequent failure of floating 
eggs to hatch if undisturbed. Young (1922) notes that in Manaos the majority of floating 
eggs did not hatch unless submerged. Of eggs floating for 20 days without hatching 96 per 
cent hatched after being submerged. Fielding (1919), however, found no difference, 
eighteen of twenty-one submerged eggs and twenty-one of twenty-three floating eggs 
hatching on the same day. 
I65 
ECLOSION 
In my experience I have found that floating eggs left undisturbed may remain largely 
unhatched and that their submergence leads to hatching. But as with many other features 
in the hatching of the eggs of this species no hard and fast line seems to hold good. 
With properly conditioned eggs laid by well-reared broods I have found, as have Shannon 
and Putnam (1934), that the number failing to hatch on submersion under appropriate 
conditions is very small. As noted by these authors a certain number of the small pro- 
portion not hatching on the first submersion may do so if re-dried and again submerged. 
Such experiences emphasise the advantage of arranging for oviposition, as is the natural 
method of choice, to be carried out in porous earthenware receptacles where the eggs are 
laid in situ under optimum conditions. If other methods are used, for example on filter 
paper, etc., allowance must be made for possible adverse effects. 
AGITATION 
Many authors have referred to the effect of agitation in bringing about hatching. Dupree 
and Morgan (1902), working with the eggs of several species of Ai;des, noted that agitation 
seems in some way associated with hatching. Eggs of many species, after remaining upon 
the surface of the water or upon the bottom of breeding vessels for days, hatch if removed 
to a phial and shaken, but if left undisturbed will remain unhatched for months. Young 
(1922) found in Manaos that when eggs of A. aegypti were submerged before they were 
ready to hatch and left undisturbed, they remained unhatched provided no food was added. 
Buxton and Hopkins also emphasise the fact that agitation is an important stimulus to 
hatching, shaking being sufficient when eggs were ready for hatching to cause them to 
hatch immediately. 
The following count made of the hatching of floating eggs when subjected to agitation 
will serve to illustrate such an effect. The hatching in the shaken eggs occurred within less 
than half an hour from the shaking. 
1. Still floating in original vessel 20 per cent 
2. Submerged by sinking with a needle 44 per cent 
3. Transferred to test tube and shaken 93 per cent 
The fact that Young found that not only floating, but also sunken eggs left undisturbed, 
remained unhatched for 5 months indicates that submergence alone may not ensure 
hatching under certain circumstances and that absence of agitation may be unfavourable 
to hatching. 
What may be considered as a form of agitation is the nibbling of eggs by larvae already 
present in the medium as described by Fielding (1919) and others. Apart from nibbling, 
the presence of larvae in active movement would also act as a form of agitation. This may 
be the explanation of the observation made by Thomas (1943) that when hatching eggs 
under sterile conditions, the degree of hatching was increased as the number of eggs was 
greater. Thus with one egg per tube 6 per cent hatched, with two eggs per tube 21 per cent 
and with fifty-three to sixty eggs per tube SOS4 per cent hatched. 
NATURE OF MEDIUM 
There is very general agreement that hatching occurs less readily in clean tap water or 
distilled water than in media rich in organic matter, such as infusions or fluids containing 
food material (Bacot, 1917; Young, 1922). Bacot says that in water of low organic content 
166 
CONDITIONS AFTER HATCHING 
the hatching of dry eggs was often delayed for weeks or months. In two instances eggs 
hatched after 5 months’ submersion. Addition of foul contaminated water, on the other 
hand, caused a high percentage of hatching in a brief time. To explain such effects Bacot 
considers the stimulus might be smell or some closely analogous stimulus. Searching for 
favourable media to produce maximum hatching Buxton and Hopkins tested the effect 
of dilute solutions of tannin (0.1 per cent), formaldehyde (0.01 per cent), maltose, mannite, 
saccharose, glucose, glycerine, methyl and ethyl alcohol, citric acid and lactose. With the 
exception of the last two, the effect of which was uncertain, they found that dilute solutions 
Table 5. Experiments with dried eggs 
Hatched by 
De cription of experiment 
Eggs 4 days dry 
Old culture fluid 
Clean tap water 
Eggs 20 days dry 
Old culture fluid 
Clean tap water 
Distilled water 
Eggs 136 days dry 
Old culture fluid 
Clean tap water 
Distilled water r- 
15 minutes L 
30 minutes \ 
Later 
Numerous 
Some Numerous 
Less numerous Numerous 
Numerous 
c. 200 
0 
0 Numerous Numerous 
c. 100 Numerous 
A few Numerous 
2 10 - 
0 8 - 
0 8 - 
of all these substances were more effective than distilled water, but none so effective as 
grass infusion. They found that if the fluid is favourable (for example, grass infusion) there 
is no difference in the hatching of eggs which have been matured and then dried and those 
which have not been dried. But if the medium is unfavourable there may be a great 
difference in the two cases, eggs that have never been dried hatching readily in distilled 
water, whilst dried eggs which had hatched readily in grass infusion failed to do so. 
Shannon and Putnam (1934), however, found that a large proportion of eggs hatched even 
in distilled water. 
Our own observations have been much like those of these authors. In general the results 
in old culture fluid are better than in tap or distilled water. There is also a noticeable 
difference in the rapidity and uniformity with which hatching takes place in old culture 
fluid. That properly conditioned eggs hatch to a considerable extent in distilled water is, 
however, clear (see Table 5). In general it has been the practice to use some diluted old 
culture fluid when placing eggs to hatch. 
PRESENCE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS 
Bacot (1916) found that water charged with organic matter and swarming with bacteria 
and yeasts exerted a powerful stimulus to the hatching of eggs that had not responded to 
immersion in clean water. Bacot (19 17) and Aitken and Bacot (1917) sterilized eggs by 
exposing them for 5-10 minutes to 2 per cent lysol followed by washing in boiled water. 
Eggs thus sterilised and kept in sterile water failed to hatch over long periods, but did so 
when exposed to the action of yeasts or bacterial cultures. Roubaud and Colas-Belcour 
(1927) found that in sterile or little contaminated water eggs may remain months without 
hatching. Addition of water rich in organic matter and containing bacteria and yeasts 
brought about rapid hatching, as also did pure bacterial cultures. On the other hand, 
ECLOSION 
Barber (1927) sterilised eggs by momentary immersion in alcohol (2-3 minutes in 80 per 
cent) and found no indication that addition of bacteria promoted hatching. Rozeboom 
(1934) found that of fresh moist eggs 35 per cent hatched in distilled water, 51 per cent in 
sterile filtered medium and 82 per cent in contaminated medium. Hinman (1932) cultured 
eggs that had been superficially sterilised in hexyl resorcinol and found only a few of 
several hundred eggs showed on hatching a growth of organisms. This author appeared to 
have no difficulty in hatching larvae from such eggs. Trager (1935), using eggs sterilised 
by the method of MacGregor and later by exposure for 15 minutes to White’s fluid (see 
under sterilisation of viable eggs), found such eggs hatched readily in the sterile medium 
used (killed yeast plus liver extract). De Meillon, Golberg and Lavoipierre (1945) ap- 
parently found no difficulty in rearing larvae from sterilised eggs. It would seem, therefore, 
that absence of micro-organisms does not necessarily prevent eggs from hatching. 
EFFECT OF ENZYMES 
Roubaud and Colas-Belcour found that animal and vegetable digestive diastases (pepsin, 
trypsin, papaine) acted in the same way as cultures of organisms or their filtrates in 
bringing about hatching. Hatching with these substances took place in a few minutes when 
in concentration capable of killing the larvae after hatching. After autoclaving they were 
ineffective. 
COOLING 
Fielding notes that of 228 eggs which failed to hatch on immersion varying from 5 to 
19 days, 128 were induced to hatch after periods of cooling (placed in the ice chest). One 
hundred and five of these hatched within 2 hours. Bacot (1917) had also noted that a fall 
of 6-10” F. usually causes a percentage of eggs to hatch, though as a rule the majority do 
not respond. Other authors have also drawn attention to the effect of cooling in bringing 
about hatching. Atkin and Bacot (1917), however, say that change in temperature of the 
water seldom caused more than a few dormant eggs to hatch and sometimes had no effect. 
EFFECT OF CHEMICALS 
Dupree and Morgan (1902) noted that A&?es eggs which normally remain unhatched will 
hatch if placed in 1 or 2 per cent formalin. Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) refer to 
Agramonte as noting that wood ashes hasten hatching. Fielding found that after short 
exposure to lysol resistant eggs hatched on being submerged in water. Soft soap 1 in 8000 
had the same effect. Roubaud (1927) notes that sulphuric ether, potassium permanganate 
and hydrogen peroxide can cause hatching, but the effects are inconstant. On the other 
hand, sodium hypochlorite has an effect comparable with that of the diastases. Eggs kept 
three months in water without hatching, hatch in less than 24 hours in eau-de-Javelle 
1 in 1000 and in l-6 days in 1 in 10,000. The newly emerged larvae die rapidly in the 
solutions. 
In the above connection it is important to recognise a distinction between what might 
be called normal hatching and that which occurs with chemicals killing the larvae in the 
act. Diaphanol causes hatching if extrusion of the larva be considered as such. -Normal 
eggs exposed for a short time to diaphanol and washed may still hatch normally with the 
168 
CONDITIONS AFTER HATCHING 
living larva, though the egg-shell has been bleached. Eggs left in diaphanol (1 in 5) for 
half an hour are often not hatched at the time, but are found next morning protruded 
from the egg-shell nearly always with the hinder part of the abdomen still lying within the 
egg-shell. The brushes are commonly expanded, even though the larval head has not 
swollen, and nearly always the egg-cap, instead of being completely detached is still 
adherent ventrally (Fig. 7 (6)). It would appear doubtful whether such ‘hatching’ is a 
vital phenomenon. The fact that the egg-cap has been cut need not indicate living action 
by the larva, as we know from what has been said above that the cap in an egg ready for 
hatching can be detached by pressure on the egg by a needle. 
REDUCED DISSOLVED OXYGEN 
Gjullin, Hegarty and Bollen (1941) found that a reduction in dissolved oxygen caused 
hatching of eggs of A. vexans and A. lateralis. King and Bushland (1940) similarly found 
that a large percentage of eggs of A. aegypti will hatch with a normal amount of dissolved 
oxygen, but only a small percentage of eggs 20 days or more old will do so unless the 
dissolved oxygen is lowered. Barber (1928), on the contrary, found that eggs embedded in 
agar or placed in broth recently boiled under vaselin failed to hatch. 
Table 6 
Anaerobic 
Boiled tap water 
Boiled distilled water Some hundreds Nearly all 
Some hundreds Nearly all 
It was thought in view of these findings that a strictly anaerobic test as used for cultures 
of anaerobic organisms would be of interest. Eggs floated on cover-glasses and kept some 
days in a moist chamber were so arranged that they could, when anaerobic conditions were 
fully established in a Bulloch’s apparatus, be tipped into boiled water and boiled distilled 
water and the results compared with eggs of the same batch treated aerobically. The results 
are given in Table 6. 
The larvae in the anaerobic experiment examined next morning were all dead, many half 
emerged from the egg. There were, however, many seen active and swimming about on the 
previous evening. The percentage of eggs hatched was 100 per cent in the boiled tap water 
and 98 per cent in the boiled distilled water. It was clear that anaerobic conditions did not 
militate against hatching, even if they were not the direct cause. 
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE 
Recently Gillett (1955a, 6) has studied variation hatching response of A. aegypti eggs from 
the genetical point of view. Using removal from water for one minute as a moderate 
stimulus, this author found differences in the response percentage to hatching not only in 
the same batch from a single female, but in batches from the result of pairing different 
females and males. Especially marked was the difference in eggs laid by two strains of the 
I69 
ECLOSION 
species, a strain from Nigeria maintained from 1947 (strain W) which gave low response, 
and one from Tanganyika started in March 1953 (strain E) which gave a high response 
often approaching 100 per cent, whether used alone, or as females or males with the 
opposite sex of strain W. The author considered that response of the eggs to hatching was 
mainly controlled by an inherited property, though the fact that the depth of diapause 
may vary within very wide limits in a single batch led him to suspect that a multiple factor 
mechanism is involved. 
(d) INCUBATION PERIOD AND HATCHING TIME 
INCUBATION PERIOD 
In many of the earlier observations in the literature the time taken for eggs to hatch is 
commonly given as from 2 to 4 days. It is evident that most of such statements relate to 
the time when eggs have been left to hatch from time of oviposition under conditions 
suitable for hatching. Actually there can be distinguished no less than four periods con- 
nected with hatching. These are: (a) The period it takes the larva to be formed and before 
which the egg cannot hatch under any circumstances. This has been termed by Buxton 
and Hopkins maturation time, but may perhaps be most simply termed incubation period. 
(b) The time during which the egg, even after full development, remains unhatched because 
the conditions for hatching have not been available and for which the term diapauseperiod 
may be used, covering such period as the egg has been left dry or wet as the case may be. 
(c) The time taken for the egg to hatch when placed under such conditions as cause it to 
hatch. (d) The time taken for the act of eclosion. As this last is at most some minutes it 
need not be further discussed here. 
For the incubation period Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond give 2-3 days from ovi- 
position at 27-29” C. and 4-5 days at 25-26” C. H. A. Johnson (1937) gives 100 hours as 
the time at 70-75” F. (21-24” C.) from oviposition until the time the primary larva has 
been formed and is ready for eclosion. Shannon and Putnam give as time of development 
to the pre-hatching state: 2-3 days at 25” C., longer under 25” C. and 4-5 days at 23.5” C. 
These authors have also made a very detailed and special investigation as to the time at 
which eggs kept moist and exposed to air (that is their time of conditioning) hatch on 
being submerged. At 24” C. larvae conditioned for 40-60 hours still took 18 hours. In 
those conditioned for 60-8 1 hours the first larvae hatched in 8 minutes on being submerged, 
but for all to hatch took another 24 hours. When conditioned for 87-l 11 hours all hatched 
in 10 minutes. 
The following are the times for incubation period as determined for a number of 
temperatures : 
Temperature Time Round figures 
(” C.) (hours) (days) 
28 74 3 
25 96 4 
23 114 5 
18 - 12 
7 Development inhibited 
1 Development inhibited 
There is thus no very marked drop in the rate of development as from 28 to 25” C. and 
only a gradual lengthening of the period to 23” C. But between the last mentioned tempera- 
170 
INCUBATION AND HATCHING TIME 
ture and 18” C. there is a rapid and disproportionate lengthening and at 7” and lower 
there is complete inhibition. 
The above relates to eggs as laid by the insect on porous earthenware. As previously 
noted floating eggs may not hatch in the normal time. This, however, is not due to delay 
in development, for such eggs when submerged and shaken hatch in a few minutes. Eggs 
submerged from oviposition, according to Shannon and Putnam show retarded develop- 
ment, and as noted by Howard, Dyar and Knab eggs sunk at oviposition are liable to be 
rendered non-viable. 
HATCHING TIME 
Once hatching has started as shown by appearance of the fissure in the egg-shell completion 
of the process quickly follows, usually within a few seconds or minutes. The time from 
submergence to appearance of the larva may, however, vary from a few minutes to 
24 hours or more. With relatively fresh eggs, including those kept up to a month or so in 
the dry condition, hatching time is usually a matter of minutes or at most an hour or two. 
Table 7. Number of larvae hatching at intervals of 20 minutes from eggs 
kept various times in the dry state and then submerged 
Number of days eggs kept in the dry state 
Minutes from I * \ 
submersion 
15 
20 
30 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
220 
Over 240 
Over 480 7 8 20 66 69 
Very many 1178 c. 200 - - 
- - - 4 0 
Less 1604 Larger - - 
number 
- - - 5 - 
Still fewer 841 Still larger - c. 100 
- - - - - 
- - - - - 
- 1780 - 23 Fair 
number 
- - - - - 
- 
- 
- - 
3 
- - 
- 
- - - 
38 Many 
- - 75 77 
- - 
- 0 
- - 
- 7 
Many 72 
- 70 
- 39 
Many 25 
- 22 
- 15 
- 7 
Much fewer 1 
- 3 
- - 
Bacot (19 16), after storing eggs 50 hours under moist conditions, found hatching took place 
in the majority of cases within 30 minutes and that eggs dried l-7 days hatched out to the 
extent of 58-84 per cent in from 1 to 4 days. Shannon and Putnam state that well-con- 
ditioned eggs on submergence hatch in from 10 seconds to 10 minutes. Conditioned eggs 
dried l-4 weeks began to hatch in 30 minutes, but in water in which food had lain for 
12 hours they hatched in 7 minutes. With floating eggs eclosion was irregular, requiring 
l-5 days or more. Eggs laid round the water’s edge were more favourably situated. 
My own experience has been very similar to that of Shannon and Putnam. Eggs kept 
moist for a few days after the period necessary for maturing hatch almost at once. Usually 
with a pot under such circumstances swarms of larvae are liberated within 5 minutes. Older 
pots commonly take about 20 minutes for the first larvae to appear and pots kept many 
months do not start for some hours and may take 24 hours or more for hatching to be 
complete. In Table 7 counts are given of the number of larvae hatching at intervals of 
20 minutes from eggs kept dry for various times. In all cases the fragments of pot with the 
eggs were placed to hatch in one-third old culture fluid in tap water at 27-28” C. 
ECLOSION 
The effect of temperature on time of hatching does not greatly differ down to about 
18” C. Some interest attaches to temperatures lower than this and especially to that at 
which hatching is inhibited. Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond give 20” C. as the minimum 
temperature at which hatching takes place. This, however, probably relates to eggs placed 
to hatch shortly after oviposition, that is it might be the effect on development. 
Conditioned eggs were found to hatch freely at 17” C. (water temperature). A fragment 
of pot placed overnight to hatch in water cooled to this temperature, and later maintained 
at it, gave a count of 239 shells and four intact eggs. Massive hatching has also been 
observed at as low as 13” C., at which temperature the young larvae are still able to live and 
are motile. Mature eggs placed to hatch at 12” C. showed, however, no normal hatchings 
up to 48 hours, though at this and even much lower temperatures an occasional dead larva 
is seen extruded from the egg-shell as previously described. At 7” C. in one experiment a 
single apparently dead larva was seen on the fifth day and a few macerated larvae on the 
ninth day. In another experiment one motionless larva was seen on the fifth day and on the 
tenth day 250 unhatched eggs and four dead half emerged larvae were counted; in still 
another trial two dead larvae were seen at 48 hours and a few more on the fourth day. 
These eggs were all conditioned and mature, so that no question of interference with 
development was at issue and the results relate only to the act of hatching. 
At 1.0” C. there were no hatchings of living larvae from two samples of mature eggs up 
to 9 and 18 days respectively. The fact that a few characteristic half-emerged larvae were 
still present strongly suggests that such were not a living phenomenon, but like the result 
of chemicals previously described were artifacts. The act of hatching as shown by these 
results can take place at a temperature as low as 13” C., below which temperature hatching 
is inhibited. 
(e) RESIDUAL EGGS 
No account of conditions affecting hatching of the eggs of A. aegypti would be complete 
without a consideration of eggs which do not hatch, or which do not hatch normally, but 
do so only after abnormally long intervals of time or by some special stimulus. Eggs 
behaving in this way have been referred to as ‘ resistant eggs ’ as a result largely of Roubaud’s 
work. Roubaud (1929), however, terms them ‘ durable’ or sometimes ‘inactive’ eggs. 
Buxton and Hopkins (1927) use the term ‘residual eggs’ and as this designation seems 
more precisely to describe such eggs, their term has been here adopted. By ‘residual 
eggs’ is here meant eggs which are still found unhatched, though viable, when other 
eggs with which they have been associated, usually the great majority, have hatched 
normally. 
Since observations on such eggs have bulked very largely in the literature, it is very 
desirable to start with a clear appreciation of the facts. In the first place, most observers’ 
experience has been that under normal conditions the great majority of mature eggs will 
hatch within minutes or hours if submerged. Buxton and Hopkins, speaking of their massed 
results, state that 80 per cent of eggs hatched by the first and 95 by the second day and they 
also make it clear that the great majority of eggs will hatch in any medium. The same would 
appear to have been the experience of Shannon and Putnam who lay little stress on the 
small percentage of eggs that do not hatch when submerged under suitable conditions. The 
chief author with a contrary opinion is Roubaud who has devoted much study to the 
=72 
RESIDUAL EGGS 
phenomenon and whose conclusions succinctly stated may be briefly given almost in his 
own words : 
(1) Certain eggs contain ‘active’ larvae ready for spontaneous hatching in from 3 to 
4 days. Even in sterile water these ‘active’ eggs hatch. This takes place at the least excita- 
tion (mechanical agitation, cold, changes in the fluid, etc.). These eggs are unsuitable for 
long preservation in the dry state. 
(2) ‘Les cufs durable’, more numerous than the above, are unsuitable for spontaneous 
hatching. They contain larvae which preserve a state of latent life in the dry egg, floating 
egg or eggs in pure water. Diastases and excitants, physical or chemical, start the process 
of hatching of such ‘inactive’ larvae and call forth resumption of active metabolism. 
Roubaud further states that if development of the egg in the mother is effected rapidly 
and if the batch is reared normally and rapidly the eggs produced are in the majority or 
totality ‘active’ eggs. On the other hand, if ovular development is tardy in the mother the 
majority of eggs are ‘inactive’. Even in the same female some eggs may be ‘active’ and 
others ‘ inactive ‘. 
Residual eggs have been seen by us under two conditions, namely, as unhatched eggs 
left in egg-pots after these have been submerged overnight or longer or as eggs left by 
isolated females in tubes which have failed to hatch. In both cases, whilst resistant eggs 
in the true sense may well occur, there are two serious causes of possible error. These are 
(1) that dried collapsed and dead eggs may swell up and appear to be still viable; and 
(2) the assumption that an egg hatched by some chemical or other exciting agent, but where 
the larva has been seemingly killed on emerging, is necessarily a vital act. The following 
experiences may be given. 
When rearing A. aegypti on a large scale the earthenware pots used for egg-laying were 
at an early stage in the work reset after being placed for hatching with the object of ascer- 
taining what proportion of eggs were still left unhatched. On examining the residue in 
such pots, sometimes after 5 or 6 days’ resetting and when no larvae were appearing, 
apparently intact and still unhatched eggs were usually present in considerable numbers. 
Examined, however, after bleaching with diaphanol most of such eggs were found to 
contain only debris or macerated embryos of different ages, being in fact collapsed eggs 
reswollen as described in a previous section. When care was taken to see that the pots 
after oviposition were kept moist sufficiently long to ensure conditioning, the appearance 
of large numbers of such apparently unhatched eggs ceased. A particularly interesting 
condition was seen in pot 981/21. 8.46(2), that is, one of two pots removed from the cage 
after oviposition on the date noted. This was put to hatch on 26. 3.47 (7 months later) 
but failed to show any larvae. Yet large numbers of seemingly intact eggs were present. 
They contained the usual macerated embryos and some with eye-spots. Left overnight in 
diaphanol it showed many ‘hatched’ larvae with the dead larva projected from the egg- 
shell, but with the caudal extremity in position and the egg-cap still attached ventrally. 
The pot was found to have been removed with third-day eggs only, for example, it must 
have contained only one night’s eggs. The pot would have kept moist for some time, but 
just not long enough to allow the eggs to reach full development and resistance before 
being desiccated. Yet after seven months they were hatched by what is termed by Roubaud 
‘stimulants irresistibles’. Seeing that these eggs must have only just become conditioned 
and not very resistant it is almost certain that the action of diaphanol was exerted on 
larvae already dead and desiccated. 
=73 
ECLOSION 
What seems to be proof that such hatchings are artifacts is that eggs have frequently 
been seen after a short exposure to diaphanol with a crack in the egg-shell indicating the 
first stage of hatching but with the larva dead, evidently killed by the chemical. Observation 
showed that the larvae were dead, but next morning it was quite common to find the same 
specimen with the larva fully extruded. If what has been said as to the mechanism of 
cutting the egg-cap be correct, there is nothing mysterious in the forcing off of the cap in an 
egg with a mature dead larva provided the egg cutter is fully developed and sharp and the 
necessary pressure is brought to bear. It is quite conceivable, therefore, that a chemical 
could cause sufficient swelling of the body of a dead larva, or for that matter of a living 
larva that might otherwise have been unable to hatch, to bring about the appearances 
shown. It has already been noted that there are differences to be seen as between the 
natural hatched larva and the artificial condition referred to. 
(f) HATCHING RESPONSE OF NORMAL EGGS 
That eggs kept under normal conditions hatch on reaching full development if submerged 
is a common phenomenon and requires no comment. That in eggs subjected to desiccation 
the primary larva passes into a state of suspended animation which may last 6 months or 
more, though a striking fact, is also a condition commonly seen in insect life and recognised 
under the term diapause. A discussion on the large question of diapause would here be out 
of place. It occurs very commonly as a result of reduced temperature, but also of restricted 
food, drought, season or other condition. Such a state may occur in the adult insect, but 
also in the egg. What is unusual in the A. aegypti egg is that the state of diapause does not 
occur in some stage in embryonic development, but as a condition affecting the fully 
developed larva. Of interest in this connection is the nature of the stimuli which are known 
in other insects to break diapause. Some of these strongly recall the stimuli already 
mentioned as bringing about hatching. The one essential stimulus and the one which in the 
great majority of eggs acts apparently without need of any further assistance is sub- 
mergence. In most cases other influences appear to be largely adjuvant, though they are 
nevertheless clearly effective and may much modify the normal response. Some of these 
influences, such as cold, agitation, action of micro-organisms, presence of larvae, suggest 
the kind of mechanical or physical stimuli already referred to as effective in diapause in 
other insects. Reduction in dissolved oxygen could be a cause underlying many of the 
other observed stimuli. Thus cooling enables water to take up more oxygen and thus 
reduces the degree of oxygen saturation. Shaking might seem at first a means of increasing 
dissolved oxygen. But if tap water be shaken it might, at a warmer room temperature, 
give up rather than take up oxygen. Obviously fluids containing organic matter and 
bacteria would be ideal for providing a medium with a low dissolved oxygen content. 
Reduction of oxygen appears to be an important stimulus, but how far it is the essential 
stimulus, as has been claimed, it is not possible at present to say. 
(g) HATCHING RESPONSE OF RESIDUAL EGGS 
How little importance has been attached by many observers to resistant eggs has been 
exemplified in the results already given. Shannon and Putnam suggest that Roubaud’s 
material was a different strain from the Brazilian strain which they themselves were using. 
I74 
RESPONSE OF RESIDUAL EGGS 
On the other hand, the experience of too many authors (Bacot, Fielding and others) has 
recorded results not unlike Raubaud’s and it would seem more probable that the solution 
lies in the methods of feeding and culture used. This would be in keeping with Roubaud’s 
hypothesis of asthenobiosis. On such a hypothesis resistant eggs might be regarded as 
eggs in which the primary larva is in some way deficient in power to puncture the egg-shell 
or in responsiveness to stimuli so that submersion alone does not cause hatching, or not 
with the same facility as with normal eggs. Such an hypothesis also receives some support 
from observations by Gillett (1955 a, b) that there may be differences in hatching response 
as between local strains of A. aegypti, the less effective eggs of two strains experimented 
with being, as judged from the author’s description, those of an otherwise less vigorous 
strain. Differences in feeding activity and other life processes have been recorded as 
characterising strains from different geographical areas and less vigorous strains may 
conceivably be more prone to lay asthenobiotic eggs. 
Whether resistant eggs are a provision for enabling the species to tide over unusually 
long periods of drought seems very doubtful since normal eggs appear already well adapted 
for this and procedures taken in the laboratory to cause hatching may merely cause eggs 
to hatch that would in nature be casualties. 
It is perhaps desirable briefly to sum up the general position, so far as the author’s 
researches have taken him, regarding resistant eggs of A. aegypti. 
(1) The conditioned eggs of well-bred females when submerged rarely fail to hatch. 
(2) The condition of dormancy of the primary larva in the egg is very similar to the 
diapause state in various insect species and as such its termination is dependent on some 
form of stimulus. Normally in A. aegypti this appears to be submersion, but in certain 
cases there are evidently accessory stimuli which may hasten, or even be necessary, to make 
cessation of the diapause state effective. 
(3) All deductions based on hatching by ‘ stimulants irresistibles’ (hypochlorite, etc.) 
require revision in view of the fact that such hatching does not necessarily indicate that 
the eggs contained a living larva, or one that would ever have hatched in nature. 
(4) Rowbaud’s conclusion that the cause of ‘durable’ eggs is asthenobiosis and due to 
inadequate vitality in some form seems very probably correct. A too hard egg-shell, a too 
poorly developed hatching spine or a too feeble larva due to asthenobiosis could each be 
a cause of deficient hatching. 
(5) It seems doubtful whether resistant eggs are a provision for tiding the species over 
periods of drought, and it seems more probable that such eggs under natural conditions 
might be fatalities and that their hatching in the laboratory might be an artifact. 
REFERENCES* 
BARBER, M. A. (1928). The food of culicine larvae. Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 43, 11-17. 
BISHOP, A. and GILCHRIST, B. M. (1946). Experiments upon the feeding of Aedes aegypti through 
animal membranes, etc. Parasitology, 37, 85-100. 
DUPREE, J. W. and MORGAN, H. A. (1902). Mosquito development and hibernation. Science, 
(n.s.) 16, 1036-8. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1919). A note on the egg-burster of eucephalous fly-larvae. Ann. Msg. Nat. 
Hist. (9), 3, 372-6. 
* For authors mentioned in the text, but not given here, see references to chapter VI. 
=75 
ECLOSION 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955a). Variation in the hatching response of A&Ies eggs (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Bull. Ent. Res. 46, 241-54. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955b). The inherited basis of variation in hatching response of Aedes eggs 
(Diptera: Culicidae). Bull. Ent. Res. 46, 255-65. 
GJULLIN, C. M., HEGARTY, C. P. and BOLLEN, W. B. (1941). The necessity of a low oxygen content 
for the hatching of AL;des mosquito eggs. J. Cell. Camp. Physiol. 17, 193-202. 
KING, W. V. and BUSHLAND, R. C. (1940). Quoted by Gjullin, Hegarty and Bollen (1941). 
ROUBAUD, E. (1929). Recherches biologiques sur le moustique de la fikvre jaune, AL;des argenteus 
Poiret, etc. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 43, 1093-209. 
ROZEBOOM, L. E. (1934). The effect of bacteria on the hatching of mosquito eggs. Amer. J. Hyg. 
20,496-501. 
SIKES, E. K. and WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1931). The hatching of insects from eggs and the 
appearance of air in the tracheal system. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 74, 165-92. 
THOMAS, H. D. (1943). Preliminary studies on the physiology of Acdes aegypti (Diptera: 
Culicidae). 1. The hatching of eggs under sterile conditions. J. Parasit. 29, 324-8. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1938). The absorption of fluid from the tracheal system of mosquito 
larvae at hatching and moulting. J. Exp. Biol. 15, 248-57. 
VIII 
EMBRYOLOGY 
(a) GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON DEVELOPMENT 
LITERATURE 
In the present connection embryology may be defined as the developmental changes taking 
place in the egg between fertilisation and hatching. Such development has been described 
for a number of families of Diptera Nematocera. Excluding those chiefly concerned with 
chromosome characters, paedogenesis, or other special aspects may be mentioned accounts 
of the embryology: of Sciara (Mycetophilidae) by Schmuck and Metz (1932), Du Bois 
(1933), Butt (1934); of Simulium (Simulidae), by Gambrel1 (1933); of Chironomus (Chiro- 
nomidae), by Kolliker (1843), Weismann (1863), Kuppfer (1866), Ritter (1890), Miall and 
Hammond (1900), Craven (1909), Hasper (19 1 l), Sachtleben (19 18) ; of Miastor (Cecidi- 
myidae), by Metschnikoff (1865). No observations at all appear to have been made up to 
date on the Culicidae. (See however Addenda, p. 718.) 
CHOICE OF MATERIAL 
For various reasons the eggs of A&Yes aegypti are not the most suitable form on which to 
study mosquito embryology and the following account is of observations upon Culex 
molestus. In A&Zes aegypti the egg coats are quite opaque, the eggs are laid singly and inter- 
mittently and hatching is apt, as has been seen, to be rather uncertain and variable. In the 
Culex egg-raft the eggs may be considered as laid almost simultaneously, the egg coats are 
somewhat transparent and show the eyes and some other details of the stage of development, 
and hatching in the case of C. molestus occurs with great regularity at 18” C. at 54 hours. 
Further the egg coats in the CuZex egg are more penetrable to fixatives and less brittle. 
TECHNIQUE 
A description of the external egg structure of C. molestus has been given by me in another 
publication (Christophers, 1945). For the method of procedure using this species rafts are 
picked up as soon as possible following oviposition as judged by their colour and kept on 
water at 18” C. for the required periods. When first laid the rafts are creamy white without 
any trace of colour or darkening. An hour after being laid the upper surface of the raft 
(posterior poles of the eggs) shows a faint greenish tinge which becomes greyish green and 
by 2 hours brownish grey. By 3 hours the raft is definitely dark. These changes are inde- 
pendent of exposure to light. Darkening does not occur uniformly over the egg. The first 
colour change is round the posterior pole. Later the whole egg becomes slightly darkened 
with a more intense ring of darkening round the posterior pole. At about 36 hours the 
eye-spots become visible through the chorion and at about the same time segmentation of 
the contained embryo can be made out, especially in fixed material. Towards the time of 
hatching the egg-breaker is visible. 
12 177 CH 
EMBRYOLOGY 
Whole eggs containing well-developed embryos are readily fYixed without special manipu- 
lation. A fixative found very useful for routine use was Bless fluid (formalin 7, glacial 
acetic 3, 70 per cent alcohol 90). Good results were also obtained with Carnoy-Le Brun 
fixative (absolute alcohol, glacial acetic acid and chloroform equal parts, mercuric chloride 
to saturation), which should be freshly made. 
In the early stages no fixative tried was satisfactory in preventing collapse of the egg 
unless this was made penetrable by puncture or cutting. The most satisfactory procedure 
was found to be that of placing the eggs in the fixative, removing to a paraffin block under 
the dissecting microscope and cutting down with a sharp razor to slice off one or other end 
of the egg according to requirements. The egg is then removed to the fixative for the 
necessary period. This gave less disturbance than puncturing. 
Eggs were sectioned serially by double embedding in celloidin and paraffin (see ch. v). 
The stain found most generally useful was Ehrlich’s haematoxylin-picric acid-eosin 
method. For the greater part, reconstruction is necessary Useful preparations can, how- 
ever, be obtained by staining the embryo in situ and examining after clearing whilst still 
within the egg-shell or after dissecting it out. 
BRIEF SUMMARY OF COURSE OF DEVELOPMENT 
Fertilisation probably takes place when the egg passes the opening of the spermathecal 
ducts during oviposition. In the early stages development follows closely that described 
for other insect forms. Following upon fertilisation there is cleavage, which results in the 
formation of the blastoderm. Following upon the formation of a uniform layer of blasto- 
derm covering the whole egg surface beneath the egg membranes there appears a thickening 
of the blastoderm giving rise to the germ band. From the edges of the germ band there 
develop folds which grow until they entirely cover the germ band, eventually forming a 
double layer, the outer layer being the serosa, the inner the amnion. Over the anterior end 
of the embryo the amnion becomes especially thickened, forming a hood-like covering to 
this portion of the embryo, cephalic amnion. A similar hood develops over the posterior 
end of the embryo, caudal amnion. Meanwhile the germ band becomes differentiated and 
thickened anteriorly, forming a projecting lobe, the precephalic element, which will form 
the future labral structures, and behind this are massive thickenings, the procephalic lobes, 
from which are developed the brain and overlying head capsule. Behind these parts are 
indications of three thoracic and nine abdominal segments. At about 12 hours there 
appears on the ventral surface, just caudal of the precephalic element, the medianly 
situated thickening which is the first indication of the rapidly developing invagination, 
the anterior mesenteron rudiment that forms the stomodaeum and eventually the alimentary 
canal as far back as the termination of the mid-gut. About the same time posteriorly is 
the invagination forming the proctodaeum from which is developed the posterior portion 
of the alimentary canal including, in the mosquito, the Malpighian tubules. Other changes 
complete the larval structure as it appears at hatching. In the present case it is these later 
changes, or organogeny, that offer most opportunity for obtaining information regarding 
certain parts of the larva of which the homologies are uncertain. 
So far as observations have been made on development in the egg of AL;des aegypti the 
changes closely follow those seen in CuZex molestus. In Table 8 has been set out the time 
in hours of the more important changes in the last-mentioned species. 
178 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
Table 8. Giving hours and stages in development 
embryo in the egg of Culex molestus of the 
Hours Stages in development 
1 Cleavage up to about eight nuclei 
2 Basket arrangement of nuclei formed in yolk 
3 Cleavage largely completed. Nuclei appearing at surface 
6 Blastoderm forms complete layer over egg 
8 Formation of the germ-band 
10 Cephalic and caudal amnion folds begin 
Germ-band extends dorsally beyond middle of egg 
Precephalic element and procephalic lobes indicated 
(Pre-stomodaeal stage) 
12 Labial groove gives bifid appearance to embryo 
Thickening of stomodaeal area with commencing invagination of anterior 
mesenteron rudiment 
(Early stomodaeal stage) 
24 Labial groove everted giving head appearance to embryo 
Antenna1 and mouth-part rudiments present 
Anterior mesenteron and proctodaeal invagination well advanced 
Caudal extremity at posterior pole of egg 
(Late stomodaeal stage) 
36 Brain mapped out and cerebral commissure formed 
Ventral nerve cord differentiated into future ganglia 
Anterior mesenteron rudiment and proctodaeal invaginations well advanced 
and Malpighian tubules forming 
Delamination of the head capsule 
Myoblasts evident in segments 
(Organogeny) 
48 
54 Egg-breaker begins to be visible 
Setae present on epipharynx and mouth-parts 
Dorsal closure completed 
Muscles of feeding brushes conspicuous 
Salivary glands present 
(Prehatching stage) 
Larva hatches 
(b) CLEAVAGE AND FORMATION OF THE BLASTODERM 
CLEAVAGE (Fig. 8 (l), (2)) 
The earliest stage seen was that in which the first cleavage nucleus had been formed. This 
is situated near the anterior end of the egg. Cleavage proceeds with great rapidity, the 
nuclei dividing with typical mitotic stages followed by separation of the newly formed 
nuclei to a distance commonly almost equal to half the diameter of the egg (Fig. 8 (2)). 
By the time the egg-raft has developed a greenish colour (about an hour from oviposition) 
there are already present eight cleavage nuclei. At the end of 2 hours fifty or more nuclei 
were counted and at the end of 3 hours, in an egg where an attempt to count the nuclei 
was made, the number was approximately 720. At the end of 4 hours, when nuclei are 
present both in the surface layer and in the yolk, an estimate of their number based on 
sample counts of portions of the egg gave approximately 2000. By 6 hours a uniform layer 
of nuclei has been formed over the whole egg surface, the estimated number of nuclei being 
5000-6000. Plotting the logs of the figures arrived at for the first 3 hours against time gave 
=79 12-2 
EMBRYOLOGY 
practically a straight line and a rate of division equivalent to three powers of 2 (23, 26, 2g) 
per hour, or a nuclear division every 20 minutes. 
This rate of division is much greater than that given by Roonwall(1936) for cleavage in 
the grasshopper egg, where the time for division arrived at in the same way would work out 
as over one hour. The time taken to form the blastoderm in the mosquito is, however, 
6 hours, as against 28 in the grasshopper, and the time to hatching in the two cases 54 hours 
and 13 days respectively. 
After 3 hours the rate of division has fallen off and the logarithmic curve falls short. 
New conditions are, however, now being introduced, for by the fourth hour the nuclei no 
longer have the appearance of actively dividing nuclei, but resemble more nuclei of formed 
blastoderm with resting chromatin and large nucleolus. 
At least in the early part of the period of active division all the nuclei divide simul- 
taneously or nearly so (Fig. 8 (2)), the appearance shown in any particular egg depending 
upon the stage that division happens to be in at the time of fixation. This stage may be that 
of the resting nucleus or some stage in mitosis. Those nuclei having characters of the resting 
nucleus are large, vesicular, globular or oval with clearly defined nuclear membrane and 
chromatin in small granules or beaded threads peripherally disposed. Probably the 
condition is more correctly described as late telophase. That they have recently divided is 
shown by the presence of the flare-like appearance in the cytoplasm as described below. 
Nuclei in process of division have no clearly defined outline or nuclear membrane. They 
appear as a cluster or clusters of deeply stained chromosomes, around which can be made 
out an area representing nuclear substance but quite diffuse in its limits. The chromosomes 
exhibit striking appearances indicating prophase, metaphase and anaphase. In all cases 
Figure 8. Formation of blastoderm and amnion. 
Showing three of four pairs of dividing nuclei in yolk towards anterior end of egg. About 
1 hour. Reconstruction. 
Showing 52 nuclei in late telophase in process of forming basket-like network in yolk. 2 hours. 
Reconstruction. The darkened nuclei are those lying on opposite side of yolk from the 
observer. 
Transverse section of egg showing complete layer of blastoderm nuclei. 6 hours. a, nuclei 
and dark staining cytoplasm of blastoderm; b, layer of light granular cytoplasm. Periplasm 
of egg; c, nuclei still in yolk showing degeneration. 
Portion of 3 showing blastoderm forming nuclei and cytoplasm. a, b, as in 3; c, small oval 
bodies in cytoplasm resembling bacilli. 
Section through posterior pole of egg showing forming blastoderm and germ cells. About 
6 hours. a, as in 4. 
Transverse section of egg showing formation of amnion (cephalic amnion) and serosa. 
10 hours. a, blastoderm; b, amnion; c, serosa. 
Transverse section of egg showing formation of germ band and thickening of cephalic area. 
12 hours. a, germ band; b, amnion; c, inward growth of cells forming cephalic lobes. 
Lateral view of embryo at 10 hours (right side is ventral). Showing formation of cephalic 
and caudal amnion. a, cephalic amnion; a’, line of edge of amnion fold; b, caudal amnion; 
c, as yet uncovered portion of embryo. 
Lettering: gee, germ cells; y, yolk. 
Note. The dark line surrounding the egg represents endochorion. The exochorion is not 
indicated. 
180 
, O-01 mm. I 4 
1 oamm. , 6 , 095 mm. 
1 005 mm. 1 7 
Figure 8 
181 
EMBRYOLOGY 
there is present in the cytoplasm a pink staining area with radial striations, attraction sphere, 
forming either a spindle or two flare-like areas at the poles of the dividing system. Small 
pink staining disk-like bodies about 2 p in diameter, presumably centrioles, are commonly 
present. 
Movement of nuclei at this time certainly appears to be associated with, or a result of, 
the division process. In the early stages of cleavage (two to four nuclei) the nuclei are 
situated near the anterior pole of the egg. In the eight-nuclei-stage telophase daughter 
nuclei are seen spreading towards the posterior pole of the egg. About this time the nuclei 
with their associated cytoplasm tend to form a globular or oval basket-work of cleavage 
nuclei. Most usually this is situated in the anterior portion of the egg gradually extending 
towards the posterior end. In forming this closed hollow cylinder the nuclei divide in a 
longitudinal, transverse and oblique direction. Those dividing in a transverse direction 
usually pass round in the plane of the cylinder wall until they reach the opposite side of the 
cylinder. 
The process described continues until a hundred or more nuclei have so arranged them- 
selves. But by the end of the third hour numbers have reached the surface of the yolk. In 
an egg in this stage a count gave 756 peripherally situated and 549 still in the depths of the 
yolk. The centrally situated nuclei remain much as before, namely large nuclei with 
elaborate expanded chromosomes. The peripherally distributed nuclei, which are no longer 
dividing synchronously with those in the basket-work, now have the appearance of tightly 
compressed chromosomal knots. These later take on the appearance more characteristic 
of the blastoderm nuclei. They still do not show any limiting nuclear membrane, but the 
chromatin is in the form of a reticular network and there is a large nucleolus. They are 
embedded at intervals in a thin, defined layer of dark cytoplasm, which appears to have been 
formed by the cytoplasm of the cleavage nuclei passing with the nucleus to the surface of 
the egg and displacing the light-staining finely reticular cytoplasm which previously formed 
the cortical layer of the egg (periplasm). This latter now forms a considerable and well- 
defined layer, the inner cortical layer, situated internal to the darker outer layer containing 
the nuclei (Fig. 8 (3, b)). 
FORMATION OF THE BLASTODERM (Fig. s(3),(4)) 
At 6 hours the characteristic appearance of (early) blastoderm is seen, the whole surface 
of the egg being uniformly covered with regularly arranged, almost contiguous, large 
globular nuclei, each with a conspicuous large nucleolus (Fig. 8 (4)). The dark superficial 
layer has now become divided by furrows apportioning it to the nuclei so that it gives the 
appearance of epithelium, except that the cells are not yet separated at their bases. In the 
yolk are still seen some nuclei which have not migrated, but they are indefinite in outline 
and for the most part apparently undergoing degeneration. 
Whether seen in surface view or in section the blastoderm stage is a most striking and 
characteristic phenomenon entirely unlike any other stage in development. When eventu- 
ally fully developed it consists of large columnar cells measuring up to 25 ,U or more in 
length with dark-staining coarsely reticular cytoplasm and a large oval nucleus containing 
a diffuse central mass (karyosome?). A peculiar appearance seen at an early stage is the 
presence of clear vacuole-like spaces lying between the nucleated layer and the underlying 
periplasm. In tangential sections these are seen as branching channels or lacunae, possibly 
collections of oily material. 
182 
CLEAVAGE AND BLASTODERM FORMATION 
Differentiation of the blastoderm cells clearly accounts for the appearance of many of 
the early tissues in the embryo. Thus the cells first forming the embryo are not very dis- 
similar to those of the blastoderm and those forming the pro-cephalic lobes in their early 
stage, though largely ‘neuroblasts’ are not unlike blastoderm cells. 
The blastoderm layer, except for a small area at the posterior pole of the egg, shows at 
one stage little or no difference in thickness. At the posterior pole, however, there are some 
large cells lying more or less extruded, the germ cells. In this area the regular covering of 
blastoderm cells is deficient, its place being taken by large globular cells lying loosely 
arranged upon the layer of periplasm. The fate of these cells will be described later. 
(c) THE GERM-BAND AND EMBRYONIC MEMBRANES 
THE GERM-BAND (Fig. 8 (7),(8)) 
The uniform layer of blastoderm thickens ventrally to form the germ-band. The thickening 
extends also beyond the posterior pole of the egg along the dorsal surface. The result is a 
thickened band of blastoderm almost completely encircling the egg longitudinally from a 
point a little dorsal of the cephalic pole along the whole ventral surface, past the posterior 
pole and along the dorsal aspect almost to the starting-point (Fig. 8 (8)). Elsewhere the 
blastoderm becomes thinned. But since the area of thickening is wide, the thinned area is 
relatively small, namely narrow bands laterally on each side linked by an area on the 
dorsal surface near the head where the posterior end of the germ-band fails to reach to the 
head end. Over these areas the blastoderm has become so thinned as to be merely a delicate 
nucleated membrane such as later always limits the yolk where this is exposed at the 
surface. Over the area occupied by the germ-band, however, the blastoderm now forms a 
deep layer of long columnar cells (Fig. 8 (7)). 
THE AMNION-SEROSA (Fig. S(6)) 
As in other insects the amnion and serosa originate in a fold, the amnion-serosalfold. This 
arises around the edges of the germ-band and, extending over the embryo, forms by its 
inner and outer layers respectively the amnion and the serosa. The outer layer of the fold 
is an extremely thin membrane formed of flattened cells. The inner layer when it is first 
formed consists of more or less cubical cells. This layer forming the amnion is continuous 
with the edges of the embryo, that is the germ-band. 
As the amnion-serosal folds become more and more extended over the embryo they are ’ 
much thinned out and the two layers closely approximated. Early in development, how- 
ever, it is usually possible to distinguish an inner thicker element with nuclei elongate oval 
in section, the amnion, and an outer exceedingly thin membrane, not above 1.0 p in thick- 
ness, with smaller and still more flattened nuclei, the serosa. Since the amnion-serosal folds 
arise around the edges of the embryo and are directed over this, such portions of the egg 
surface as are outside the germ-band are at first not covered by amnion-serosa, but only by 
thinned blastoderm, which, however, closely resembles the serosa with which it is con- 
tinuous. As the area of exposed yolk, however, becomes covered eventually by extension 
over it of the embryonic margins carrying with them the amnion-serosal folds, the whole 
egg surface beneath the egg-shell becomes covered with amnion-serosa. Eventually this 
I83 
EMBRYOLOGY 
becomes detached from all underlying connection to become the thin membrane which is 
left lining the egg-shell after the larva has hatched. 
The final stages of the covering-in process, referred to as dorsal closure, are not so 
important in the mosquito as in some insects where the yolk is relatively large in amount 
compared to the embryo. They will be described later. 
THE CEPHALIC AMNION 
Though the amnion-serosa takes origin all round the edge of the germ-band it is specially 
conspicuous and thickened in certain areas, namely at the cephalic and caudal ends of 
the germ-band where it forms what appear as hood-like folds. The two portions may be 
distinguished respectively as the cephalic and caudal amnion-serosa (Fig. 8 (8)). The cephalic 
amnion-serosa, as it develops, progresses in a ventral direction overriding the cephalic end 
of the embryo and eventually, with the later developed lateral fold, covers most of the 
ventral surface of the egg. The cephalic amnion is particularly thick and massive near its origin 
where it is continuous with the edge of the thickened embryo in its anterior portion. The 
appearance is here much as if two deeply-thrust-in pockets had been formed, and in trans- 
verse sections these two pouches appear as deep fissures around which, radially arranged, 
are large cells such as later are characteristic of neuroblasts. 
Each pouch eventually becomes divided into two, due to a fraenum-like extension of the 
amnion-serosa, namely an anterior or Zabral pouch which covers the rudiment of the feed- 
ing brush of its side, and a posterior larger pouch, cephalic pouch, which covers the pro- 
cephalic lobe of its side. The labral pouches lie on each side of the anterior end of the 
embryo, a reflection of the amnion forming a tongue dorsally between them. Their thickened 
floor becomes increasingly conspicuous as the large button-like rudiments of the feeding 
brushes develop. The cephalic pouches extend backwards nearly to the mid-dorsal line, 
being separated only by a narrow portion of uncovered yolk. Their thickened floor later 
forms the brain and head capsule overlying this. 
THE CAUDAL AMNION 
About the time that the cephalic amnion is forming a fold over the anterior end of the 
embryo the caudal amnion is similarly forming a thickened hood over the posterior 
extremity. At this stage the posterior end of the germ-band is, as already noted, situated 
dorsally not very far behind the dorsal extension of the cephalic amnion (Fig. 9 (1)). Here 
the germ-band dips inwards forming a deep pocket in a somewhat globular mass of 
cellular tissue, in the deeper portions of which are now situated the germ cells, apparently 
moved forwards by extension of the posterior end of the embryo from their former position 
at the pole of the egg. In this position too there forms a dimple which is the first indication 
of the proctodaeal invagination. As with the cephalic amnion, the caudal amnion, where it 
is continuous with the embryo in the region of the pouch, is thick and massive. As it 
extends backwards to meet the lateral amnion it becomes thin and membranous. 
THE LATERAL AMNION 
Somewhat later in starting than the cephalic and caudal folds a less massive fold can be 
traced along the edge of the embryo. Where this joins the cephalic fold, that is just 
posterior to the cephalic lobe, there is an inconspicuous fraenum serving as a landmark 
between the parts in the cephalic pocket and those lying posterior to this. 
184 
EMBRYOLOGY 
(d) FORMATION OF THE EMBRYO 
The precephalic element (Fig. 9). Underlying the most anterior portions of the cephalic 
amnion on each side and forming the floor of the labral pouches are convex areas of 
blastoderm which soon begin to develop as the future feeding brushes. These form button- 
like masses composed of long closely packed columnar cells early showing indications of 
forming the filaments which characterise the mature organs. Throughout later development 
these large button-like bodies form a striking feature of the embryo, giving at times rather 
the appearance of the suckers on the head of a tapeworm. 
At first the rudiments are separated in the median line ventrally by a deep groove, Zabral 
groove, indenting the cephalic end of the embryo and extending back on the ventral surface 
as far as the position of the future stomodaeum (Fig. 9 (5)). The presence of this deep 
groove gives rise to a very characteristic appearance indicating a stage to which develop- 
ment has progressed, namely an embryo with a bifid anterior end. Later the deep sulcus 
becomes everted so that a prominent projecting lobe is formed. With the increase in size 
of the feeding brush rudiments, eversion of the labral groove and further delamination of 
the amnion dorsally the parts anterior to the procephalic lobes become marked off by 
a neck-like constriction to form an almost head-like projection. This pseudo-head may be 
termed the precephalic element. With its appearance the embryo takes on a further easily 
recognised and very characteristic stage. The parts forming the precephalic element are 
preoral in position and anterior to the procephalic lobes with their extensions forming the 
antenna1 rudiments. They give rise to the feeding brushes with their supporting structures 
and that part of the larval head usually described as the fronto-clypeus. The smooth 
convex ventral surface of the precephalic element formed by eversion of the labral groove 
gives rise to the epipharyngeal structures as far back as the larval pharyngeal opening. 
There can be little doubt that all the structures derived from it represent the labral segment, 
preoral in position and anterior to the antennae and eyes. 
The procephalic lobes. Lying under that portion of the amnion forming the cephalic pouch 
is an area of blastoderm that early undergoes thickening indicative of the formation of 
the brain. This area is sharply demarcated dorsally where it comes up against the yolk and 
the thickened base of the amniotic fold. Anteriorly it abuts upon the head-like precephalic 
element and at each side of this border it shows swellings which later become prominences, 
the antennal rudiments (Fig. 9 (2), (3)). The procephalic lobes are characterised by the 
presence of large cells with nuclei containing a central mass surrounded by a clear zone. 
Cells of this type are seen where brain or ganglionic tissue develops and are precursors of 
neuroblasts. Originally a single layer of blastoderm cells, the procephalic lobe area, soon 
becomes greatly thickened to form on each side a cellular mass extending deeply into the 
yolk. Eventually the masses meet in the middle line to form the rudiment of the proto- 
cerebral commissuraZ tract. It can be seen too that, whilst in other directions the developing 
nervous tissue is rather sharply delimited, there is ventrally a passage of such tissue into that 
developing about the neural groove. These areas eventually form the cerebral connectives. 
The stomodaeal area (Fig. 9 (5)-(8)). Between the neurogenic areas just described there is 
situated ventrally what is at first a relatively thin area of germ-band, the stomodaeal area. 
At an early stage this consists of a single layer of columnar cells with a certain number of 
polygonal cells lying beneath it. Anteriorly this area extends as far forwards as the ventral 
185 
EMBRYOLOGY 
termination of the labral groove, or, when this becomes everted, to the bulged ventral 
surface of the precephalic element. Laterally the limits are well-defined, especially where 
they come up against that part of the cephalic lobes which will eventually develop into the 
antenna1 rudiment. Posteriorly the area occupies the notch where the neurogenic tissue of 
the future ventral nerve cord extends forwards in a forked fashion to link up with the 
cephalic lobes . 
Approximately in the centre of the area fairly early in development and before eversion 
of the labral groove some of the blastoderm cells show some elongation, thereby indi- 
cating where the stomodaeum will form. A little later this point is backed by a button-like 
mass of proliferating polygonal cells with reticular nuclei constituting the beginning of the 
anterior mesenteron rudiment (Fig. 9 (5)). A dimple followed by a deepening depression 
now starts the invagination that forms the stomodaeum and eventually the anterior portion 
Figure 9. Formation of the embryo. 
Lateral view of embryo at 15 hours. Ventral to right. Showing early segmentation and 
appearance of the anterior mesenteron rudiment. Reconstruction. a, anterior pouch of 
cephalic amnion and indication of feeding brush rudiment; b, posterior pouch of cephalic 
amnion and procephalic lobe; c, first indication of stomodaeal invagination. 
Dorsal view of embryo prior to dorsal closure, 24 hours. a, precephalic element with 
indication of feeding brush rudiments; b, procephalic lobe; c, thoracic segments. 
Lateral view of embryo, same stage as 2. Reconstruction. a, b, c, as in 2. 
Dorsal view of embryo showing stomodaeal and proctodaeal invaginations. Reconstruction. 
a, b, as in 2. 
Ventral view of anterior end of embryo at 12 hours showing labral groove and early anterior 
mesenteron rudiment with beginning of stomodaeal invagination. a, labral groove; 
b, rudiment of feeding brush; c, anterior mesenteron rudiment with beginning of stomodaeal 
invagination. 
Ventral view of later stage. 24 hours. Showing eversion of labral groove and appearance 
of antenna1 rudiments and common rudiment of mandible and maxilla. The same stage is 
shown in lateral view in 3. Magn. as for 5. 
Precephalic element. Ventral view. 28 hours. a, indication of feeding brush rudiment; 
b, beginning of epipharynx; c, slit-like entrance into stomodaeal funnel; d, lip-like fold 
anterior to stomodaeal opening. Rudiment of suspensorium. 
On the right the mandibular and maxillary rudiment, as also the antenna1 rudiment, are shown 
as cut away. 
8 The same dorsal view. a, area becoming pre-clypeus; b, area becoming clypeus; c, area 
between cephalic lobes dorsally. 
9 Inner view of developing brain. About 30 hours. Reconstruction. I, protocerebrum with 
cerebral commissure ; II, deutocerebrum pointing towards antenna1 rudiment and later 
giving rise to antenna nerve ; III, tritocerebrum with commissure ; g, sub-oesophageal ganglion 
with cut-away circum-oesophageal connective. 
The arrow shows position of stomodaeal invagination. 
10 Tangential section through ventral ganglionic area. a, conspicuous twin nuclei. Probably 
connected with forming inter-commissural tracts ; b, cellular masses of future ganglion tissue ; 
c, mesodermal tissue with forming myoblastic tissue. 
Lettering: A, anal lobe; amr, anterior mesenteron rudiment; an.r, antenna1 rudiment; anp, anal 
papillae ; g, ganglion; gee, germ cells ; md, rudiment of mandible ; md’, cut base of same; mdx, 
common rudiment of mandible and maxilla; Mt, Malpighian tubules; mx, rudiment of maxilla; 
mx’, cut base of same ; pcd, proctodaeal invagination ; pee, precephalic element ; Sd, stomodaeum; 
Sd’, position of stomodaeal invagination; y, yolk. 
186 
5 
an.r 
, @l mm. 1 9 , PO5 mm. 1 IO 
Figure 9 
If37 
EMBRYOLOGY 
of the alimentary canal as far as the termination of the mid-gut, but in the mosquito not 
the Malpighian tubules. 
As the anterior mesenteron rudiment increases in size its cells replace the original blasto- 
derm of the notch between the cephalic lobes, and there is formed an area of some extent in 
which the cells have wholly the character of those of the rudiment. The stomadaeal 
opening deepens and widens, forming a flattened funnel. The dorsal wall of this funnel, 
which will become the roof of the larval pharynx, merges without break into the ventral 
surface of the precephalic element, now largely formed by the everted labral groove. In 
each lateral angle of the funnel, close up against the now bulging antenna1 rudiment 
eventually to become the antenna1 prominence, there develops a small notch where the 
fishhook-like lateral oral apodeme of its side will appear. Ventrally the edge of the opening 
forms a low lip-like ridge, later to become the suspensorium of the larval head. 
Just ventral to this lip on each side there arise the rudiments of the mandible and maxilla. 
These commonly commence as a single globular projection on which there later appears 
a groove or fissure dividing off a dorsal portion, the mandibular rudiment, from a more 
ventral portion, the maxillary rudiment. Even up to the end of development, however, 
these two structures largely have a common base (Fig. 9 (7)). In the median line a little 
posterior to the ventral lip of the stomodaeum is an area which much later develops into 
the hypostomal area and mental sclerite of the larva. 
Body segmentation. In the early stomodaeal stage, when the germ-band still extends far 
forwards on the dorsal surface, segmentation becomes indicated by the appearance of 
slight annular constrictions (Fig. 9 (1)). Starting from the sulcus that indicates the posterior 
limit of the procephalic lobes eleven more or less normally developed segments can be 
counted. Of these the first three are the three thoracic segments, at this time no larger or 
noticeably different from the following eight, which are abdominal segments I-VIII. In 
addition there is a terminal mass that becomes evident with the retraction of the caudal 
extremity to the posterior extremity of the egg (Fig. 9 (2), (3)). The eighth abdominal 
segment later becomes considerably enlarged, especially in its dorsal parts, which are early 
freed from amnion and eventually form the soft somewhat globular respiratory siphon of 
the newly hatched larva. The small terminal segment becomes the anal segment. With the 
invagination of the proctodaeum it comes to form a ring around the proctodaeal opening 
from which there project the anal papillae. These are first formed within the proctodaeal 
opening and only later come to project externally. 
Nothing resembling clearly defined mandibular, first maxillary or second maxillary 
segments, as are present in many insect embryos, has been made out in the embryo of the 
mosquito. All that can be said is that there is an area posterior to the mandibular and 
maxillary rudiments and lying between these and the first thoracic segment which might 
represent such segments. 
Dorsal closure. Eventually the segments of the embryonic abdomen become clearly de- 
limited on the ventral aspect by surface constrictions and by segmentation of the mesoderm, 
followed by the arrangement of developing myoblasts derived from this, as also by the 
differentiation of the ventral ganglia. Dorsally also there is an indication of the first 
thoracic segment being closed in just caudal to the procephalic lobes. Abdominal seg- 
ments VIII, VII and VI, in this order, also early become completed dorsally, followed by 
partial closure of segment V and to some extent of segment IV. Over the remaining 
188 
FORMATION OF THE EMBRYO 
segments, occupying about the middle third of the egg, there remains until a comparatively 
late stage an oval exposure of the now much diminished yolk (Fig. 9 (2), (3)). 
This area of uncovered yolk is small and its final covering in (dorsal closure) is less 
important in the mosquito than in the case of many insects where the yolk surface may be 
relatively large. Nevertheless, something requires to be said regarding it. In the very early 
stages the yolk is left exposed at the surface in three positions, (1) on the dorsal aspect of 
the cephalic end of the embryo, with an extension backwards between the procephalic 
lobes; (2) covering the dorsal surface between the procephalic lobes and the caudal 
amnion dorsally; and (3) in two narrow strips down the sides of the egg between the germ- 
band on the ventral surface and its continuation on the dorsal surface of the egg. 
The first-mentioned area, that part of the yolk exposed near the cephalic pole, is en- 
croached upon and finally covered by backward extension of the cephalic amnion-serosal 
fold, so giving rise to important structures as described later under organogeny. Areas 2 
and 3, after retraction of the caudal extremity of the embryo to the posterior pole of the 
egg, become merged into a single area. As development proceeds this is progressively closed 
in as already described by growth from the sides of the last few segments, the general effect 
being that there is left an oval area of exposed yolk occupying about the middle third of 
the egg on the dorsal surface. This area gradually becomes covered by growth from the 
sides and surrounding areas. By this time the anterior mesenteron rudiment has progressed 
backwards as far as the hinder border of the procephalic lobes and here comes into close 
connection with the anterior end of the exposed oval area of yolk. It is possible that cells 
derived from it play some part in the final closure. 
The anterior mesenteron rudiment. The anterior mesenteron rudiment, at first a somewhat 
rounded mass of cells with the stomodaeal depression at its centre, rapidly grows back- 
wards as a hollow finger-like process until it reaches the anterior end of the now much 
reduced yolk mass. This it does just caudal of the procephalic lobes dorsally. It is at this 
point that it comes into close connection with, and may help to complete, dorsal closure. 
Having reached so far, the walls of the rudiment split and continue growing caudal in the 
form of twin, rapidly growing ribbons. These consist of a layer facing inwards of columnar 
cells resembling those of the rudiment more anteriorly and a layer facing outwards of what 
seems to be mesoblast. At about one-third of the embryo’s length from the posterior pole 
the ribbons meet and eventually fuse with the blind extremity of the proctodaeal invagi- 
nation (Fig. 9 (4)). 
The general outline of the alimentary canal can now be clearly seen. Anteriorly is the 
wide mouth, the anterior opening of the stomodaeal funnel, the site of the stomodaeum. 
Behind this lies the funnel itself which becomes the pharynx and its posterior narrow part 
the oesophagus. Still further back is a swollen portion indicating the future proventriculus. 
From the ribbons which grow round and largely enclose the yolk is formed the larval 
mid-gut. The remaining portions of the canal, including the Malpighian tubules, are 
formed from the proctodaeal invagination. 
The proctodaeal invagination. In the prestomodaeal and early stomodaeal stages the caudal 
extremity of the germ-band lies somewhat curled inwards and limited in this direction by 
the fornix of the caudal amnion-serosa. Extending inwards from the fornix in the middle 
line is a button-like mass of cells, theposterior mesenteron rudiment. Into this there extends 
from the amniotic cavity a finger-like hollow which indicates the position of the future 
EMBRYOLOGY 
proctodaeum. In the cell mass are a number (about fifteen) of large cells, germ cells, which 
in the blastoderm stage occupied the posterior pole of the egg and which will end up 
eventually in the fifth and sixth abdominal segments where they give rise to the gonads. 
As development proceeds the caudal extremity of the embryo is dragged backwards so that 
it comes to lie at the posterior pole. By this time the proctodaeal invagination has passed 
some distance forwards. Later the invagination deepens rapidly and at about one-quarter 
of the egg length from the posterior end it meets and fuses with the anterior mesenteron 
rudiment. Before it does so there appear as outgrowths from its inner end five tubules 
which eventually become the Malpighian tubules. At an early stage four tubercles appear 
just inside the proctodaeal opening. They elongate and project through the anus as sharp 
pointed outgrowths eventually to become the anal papillae. 
The neural groove and ventral nerve cord. In the early stomodaeal stage indication of the 
formation of the ventral nerve cord is given by the appearance in the mid ventral line of a 
groove, neural groove. This is a narrow sharply incised depression made more conspicuous 
in sections by the occurrence at intervals of characteristic large elongate cells with the 
rounded body of the cell lying inwards. As previously noted tissue containing such neuro- 
blasts connects up the procephalic lobes with an area lying behind the stomodaeal area. 
Similar tissue occupies a broad band on the ventral aspect of segments as far back as the 
caudal extremity and gives rise in due course to the ventral nerve cord. 
Formation of the mesoderm. No appearance suggesting formation of a median ventral 
invagination giving origin to the mesoderm has been seen, though such a stage, if of short 
duration or modified in character, may have been overlooked. 
The mesoderm is first evident in the early stomodaeal stage as a mass of cells on each 
side of the anterior mesenteron rudiment. A bridge of similar cells links up the two masses 
anterior to the rudiment. Extensions of loosely arranged cells also pass forwards from 
these masses towards the precephalic element and posteriorly soon become linked up with 
mesoblastic tissue along the rapidly developing anterior mesenteron rudiment. Cell masses 
having a similar appearance also appear about this time on each side of the ventral nerve 
cord (Fig. 9 (10)). 
(e) ORGANOGENY 
THE LABRAL STRUCTURES (Fig. 9 (7),(8)) 
As already noted, the precephalic element, owing to its anterior projection, its large size, 
the presence of the conspicuous feeding brush rudiments and its pinched-in neck, is a very 
striking feature of the embryo. Before eversion it is responsible for the bifid anterior 
extremity of the embryo and, after eversion, it might easily be mistaken for the head of the 
embryo. Following eversion, its ventral surface is much expanded forming a smooth 
convex area. Across the middle of this area there develops a transverse thickening in the 
middle of which is a small differentiated area. The latter becomes the so-called epipharynx 
(that is the peculiar median process with a crown of setae so conspicuous in the larva). The 
transverse thickening becomes the epipharyngeal bar. A large part of the ventral surface 
remains undifferentiated and eventually constitutes the large post-epipharyngeal lobe of the 
larva. Where the ventral surface is continued into the dorsal wall of the stomodaeal funnel 
a dimple forms which will ultimately develop into the frontalganglion. The position of this 
190 
ORGANOGENY 
ganglion therefore marks very definitely in the larval head where the original embryo 
surface ends and the stomodaeal invagination begins. 
The portion of the element situated apically between the two brush rudiments becomes 
the hairy lobe that has been termed the palatum. The subsequent history of the palatum 
shows that this is the labrum, sen,su stricto, its hypodermis eventually forming the trunk- 
like projection in the pupa which becomes the labrum of the imago. 
On the dorsal surface of the precephalic element and situated between the feeding brush 
rudiments is an area shaped like an inverted heart formed of rather small cubical cells. 
This can be identified clearly as the rudiment of the future preclypeus of the larva. The 
area caudal of this forming the broad basal bulge of the element is the area previously 
described as formed by the backward progression of the cephalic amniotic fold. It is 
formed of cells having the appearance of blastoderm. It eventually forms the clypeus of 
the larva, that is the area lying between the diverging frontal sutures and forming the 
greater part of the dorsal surface of the head of the larva. It is this area which mainly 
forms the bulged front portion of the head that is so striking a feature of the young first 
instar larva and ends as the relatively insignificant clypeus of the imago. Beneath this 
blastoderm-like area myoblasts early appear which eventually form the large muscular 
masses working the feeding brushes, and a little posterior to these a specialised area develops 
that gives rise to the egg-breaker. 
The rudiments of the feeding brushes occupy the sides of the precephalic element. The 
brushes develop from button-like masses on the floor of the pouches in which they are 
first formed and which it may be recalled are the anterior pouches formed by the cephalic 
amnion. As the brush filaments increase in length they pass inwards and backwards out 
of these pouches to the position they eventually occupy in the hatching larva. 
It seems clear that all the structures mentioned are parts of a preoral segment or lobe 
corresponding to the primitive labrum of the generalised insect head. 
STRUCTURES DERIVED FROM THE CEPHALIC LOBES (Fig.9(9)) 
The area which the cephalic lobes occupy at an early stage in development may be described 
as rather like a butterfly’s wings, expanding from the narrow stem at the bifurcation of the 
neurogenic area of the germ-band ventrally to the broad posterior borders which approach, 
but do not meet, each other on the dorsal surface of the embryo. Each lobe forms a massive 
plaque of thickened epidermal layer containing large modified cells developed around a 
deep fissure (the cephalic amnion pouch), the outer wall of the fissure being greatly thickened 
amnion and the inner wall original germ-band. Later the amniotic portion becomes pro- 
gressively shrunken and to a large extent eventually disappears by delamination. By such 
delamination the deeper parts are left to form the brain. The delaminated layer includes the 
antenna1 rudiments, later to become the antennalprominences and that portion of the head 
capsule forming the genae. Towards the ventral aspect the procephalic lobe areas abut upon 
the post-oral area and at this point on each side there develops a deep sulcus. In the larva 
this becomes the hypostomal suture separating the genal from the labial area. 
The brain (Fig. 9 (9)). With the thickening of the procephalic lobe areas and ingrowth of 
the characteristic neurogenic tissue containing large neuroblasts there come to be formed 
two large lateral masses. By continued inward growth these eventually meet in the middle 
line across remnants of the yolk, forming what will later appear as the cerebral commissure. 
191 
EMBRYOLOGY 
Where the procephalic lobes lie lateral to the stomodaeal area two further neurogenic 
tracts develop forming the cerebral connectives, linking the procerebral lobes with the 
ventral nerve chain. The main mass of the delaminated lobes becomes theprotocerebrum (I). 
Only much later in the fourth instar larva do the large optic lobes develop and become 
linked with the more central portion of the brain. Forming the most anterior portion of the 
protocerebral lobes are two prominent portions which become the deutocerebrum (II), from 
which are eventually developed the antenna1 nerves. Lying somewhat ventral to the last- 
mentioned lobes there is on each side a small, but well-demarcated, lobe with its own core 
of neuropile, the tritocerebrum (III). From the tritocerebral lobes a small commissural 
tract crosses the median line close to, but distinct from, the larger connectives passing 
from the protocerebral lobes to the sub-oesophageal ganglion. 
THE VENTRAL NERVE CORD 
At an early stage the neurogenic area posterior to the stomodaeum shows three neuropile 
areas which later fuse to form the heart-shaped sub-oesophageal ganglion. Along the ventral 
aspect of the embryo the broad band of neurogenic tissue similarly becomes differentiated, 
indicating the position of the future thoracic and abdominal ganglia. These first become 
clearly evident as areas of pinkish stained neuropile. In coronal section at about 36 hours 
these show two conspicuous nuclei, one on each side of the median line at about the middle 
of the segment (commissural ?), and anterior and posterior to this from two to three compact 
groups of nuclei which appear to be the forerunners of the cortical areas of the ganglia. 
The ganglia so indicated are three thoracic and eight abdominal, the eighth abdominal 
ganglion lying in the eighth abdominal segment. No appearances have been seen of 
neuropile areas posterior to the eighth segment or indicating that the eighth abdominal 
ganglion includes more than one such area. When fully formed the ventral neurogenic 
cord is relatively broad, occupying a large part of the ventral aspect of the segments, as is 
the case also in the newly hatched larva. 
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
In the late stomodaeal stage collections of mesoderm cells in various parts of the body take 
on the appearance of myoblasts and the development of muscular bundles rapidly follows. 
Among the most conspicuous of such are the large internal and external retractor muscles 
of the feeding brushes. These develop beneath that portion of the precephalic element 
which has previously been noted as becoming the clypeus of the larva. Since in the larva 
the muscles in question arise well back on the dorsum of the larval head, their origin in the 
precephalic element is confirmatory that the dorsum of the larval head is largely formed 
from this element, which there seems reason to believe is essentially labral in nature and 
pre-oral. Other conspicuous bundles form in the thoracic and abdominal segments lateral 
to the ventral nerve cord (Fig. 9 (10)). 
OTHER LATER DEVELOPMENTS 
The development of the alimentary canal, and nervous and muscular systems has already 
been indicated. One or two further details may be mentioned. A conspicuous feature of 
the embryo in the later stages are the ocelli. These first appear, indicated by their pigment, 
192 
ORGANOGENY 
at about 36 hours and later become fully developed as the ocelli of the first instar larva. 
Another feature conspicuous in the later stages is the egg-breaker. This becomes visible 
through the egg-shell somewhat later than the ocelli (at about 45 hours). It is situated on 
the precephalic element immediately posterior to the origin of the internal retractor muscles 
of the feeding brushes. These muscles take origin largely on the anterior border of the egg- 
breaker and as they pass between this structure and the feeding brushes their contraction, 
if it fails to move the feeding brushes, would seemingly drag forwards the spine of the egg- 
breaker. Other features of late development are the structural details and hairs associated 
with the mouth-parts and body generally. These appear only in the latest stages and have 
not been followed in detail. For the conditions in this respect at full development see under 
the section dealing with eclosion. 
REFERENCES 
BUTT, F. M. (1934). Embryology of Sciara (Sciaridae: Diptera). Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 27,565-79. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1945). Structure of the Culex egg and egg-raft in relation to function. 
Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 95, 25-34. 
CRAVEN, W. N. (1909). Some observations on the embryology of Chironomus. Proc. Iowa Acad. 
Sci. 16, 221-8. 
DU BOIS, A. M. (1933). A contribution to the embryology of Sciara (Diptera). J. Morph. 54, 
161-92. 
GAMBRELL, F. L. (1933). The embryology of the blackfly Simulium pictipes. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 
26, 641-71. 
HASPER, M. (1911). Zur Entwicklung der Geschlechtsorgane bei Chironomus. Zool. Jb. 31, 
543-612. 
KOLLIKER, A. (1843). Observationes de prima insectorum genesi, etc. (Mainly Chironomus.) 
Ann. Sci. Nat. (2), 20, 253-84. 
KUPPFER, C. (1866). Ueber des Faltenblatt an den Embryonen der Gattung Chironomus. Arch. 
Mikr. Anat. 2, 385-98. 
METSCHNIKOFF, E. (1865). Ueber die Entwicklung der Cecidomyienlarven aus dem Pseudovum. 
Vorlgufige Mittheilung. Arch. Naturgesch. 31, 304-10. 
MIALL, L. C. and HAMMOND, A. P. (1900). The Structure and Life History of the Harlequin FZy 
(Chironomus). Clarendon Press, London. 
RITTER, R. (1890). Die Entwicklung der Geschlechtsorgane und Darmes bei Chironomus. 
2. wiss. ZooZ. 50, 408-27. 
ROONWALL, M. L. (1936). Studies on the embryology of the African migratory locust. qart I. 
Phil. Trans. B, 226, 391-421. 
SACHTLEBEN, H. (1918). Uber die Entwicklung der Geschlechtsorgane von Chironomus, etc. 
Dissertation, pp. l-59. Miinchen. 
SCHMUCK, M. L. and METZ, C. W. (1932). The maturation divisions and fertilization in eggs of 
Sciara coprophila. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Wash. 18, 349-52. 
WEISMANN, A. (1863). Die Entwicklung der Dipteren im Ei, nach Beobachtungen an Chironomus, 
etc. 2. wiss. ZooZ. 13, 107-220. 
I3 I93 
IX 
THE LARVA 
(a) GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
The first author to describe the larva of AL;des aegypti appears to have been James (1899), 
who figures it as the larva of the tiger mosquito; see also Theobald (1901), vol. I, p. 28, 
where James’s description is given as that of the larva of Culex fasciatus. Many other 
authors have since described the larva in various degrees of detail, usually from the point 
of view of characters of systematic importance. One of the most complete descriptions of 
its external characters is that by Macfie (1917), who has described the chaetotaxy and other 
cuticular structures of the different instars.* 
To the naked eye the chief distinguishing characteristics of the larva of Ak’des aegypti 
(Fig. 10 (1)) are its rather cylindrical and elongate form and the dead white colour of the 
body due to the almost entire absence of sclerotised parts other than the head and siphon, 
which latter being almost black offers a marked contrast to the rest of the insect. 
The head is rather globular and, at least in the later stages, small in relation to the thorax. 
Anteriorly are the clypeal structures carrying the feeding brushes (f.). The antennae (an) 
are much reduced in size compared with many culicine larvae, small, cylindrical and smooth. 
They carry a little distal to the middle a small simple antenna1 hair (Fig. 10 (2) anh), which 
is double in the first instar, and a small simple terminal hair (ant). The head hairs are small 
and inconspicuous. Laterally are the developing imaginal compound eyes (om) and the 
larval ocelli (0~). 
The thorax is roughly globular in shape consisting of the fused three thoracic segments, 
* Among other authors who have given descriptions of the larva are Blanchard (1905), Goeldi (1905), Wesche 
(1910), Doane (1910), Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912), Cooling (1924), Kumm (1931), Barraud (1934), Bonne- 
Wepster and Brug (1932), Walkiers (1935), Hopkins (1936). For authors describing special structures or systems 
see the appropriate sections. 
Figure 10. Showing external characters of fourth instar larva. 
1 Mature fourth instar larva. Dorsal view. 
2 Antenna of same. Dorsal view and terminal portion. 
3 Terminal segments of same. Lateral view. 
4 Comb spines. 
5 Pecten spines. 
6 Showing dorsal view of base of dorsal (caudal) hairs. 
7 Showing basal thickenings of hairs of ventral fan. 
Lettering : A, anal segment; Adh, dorsal or caudal hairs : 1, dorso-internal hairs. 2, ventro- 
internal hairs ; Adp, dorsal plate; Ap, anal papillae ; Ash, saddle hair; an, antenna; anh, antenna1 
hair; ant, terminal hair of antenna; cm, comb; CY, cratal tufts of ventral fan; cr’, simple hairs of 
same; fb, flabella (feeding brushes) ; Zh, lateral hairs; MS, mesothorax; MT, metathorax; 
oc, ocellus; om, ommatidia of adult eye; PR, prothorax; pet, pecten; ph, pilot hair; rt.r, pupal 
trumpet rudiment; s, respiratory siphon; sh, siphon hair; spl, perispiracular lobe; st, spiracular 
puncta; tt, tracheal trunks showing at intersegments. 
I94 
t Adh \ am 
\ 
anh 
I) 
, 
, 
2 
Figure 10 
I95 13-2 
THE LARVA 
except just after hatching when these are distinct. The segments are, however, indicated by 
their hair series. Each of the segments, besides many small hairs, carries long lateral hairs 
arising from small chitinised plates, those of the meso- and metathorax being produced 
into sharp, thorn-like points very characteristic of the species. In the mounted larva the 
lateral hairs give the appearance of being closely approximated in tufts, but in the living 
larva free in water the hairs of each segmental series stand out more or less evenly spaced in 
a plane transverse to the body length. Though they are movable, the lateral hairs are not 
supplied with any muscles and if used in swimming must take their movements secondarily 
from those of the body. Most probably their chief function is sensory and protective. 
Among the lateral hairs are included the pleural hairs of Keilin, representing respectively 
the pro-, meso- and metathoracic legs. In the fourth instar can be seen, in the shoulders of 
the thorax, the rudiments of the future pupal respiratory trumpets (Fig. 10 (1) rt.r) which as 
pupation approaches become more and more conspicuous, until, when they finally become 
yellow, they give an indication that the larva will shortly pupate. Also conspicuous in the 
fourth instar larva, seen through the cuticle, are the imaginal discs or buds of the legs, 
wings and halteres as described in the section on the prepupa (ch. XIII). 
The abdomen, apart from the small terminal anal segment, consists of eight roughly 
equal segments increasing in size somewhat to the third and then decreasing to the last or 
eighth. Each of these segments carries a number of hairs, including a decreasing series of 
long lateral hairs comparable with those of the thorax. At the posterior lateral aspect of 
the eighth segment on each side is a conspicuous row of spiny scales, comb teeth, forming 
the comb (Fig. 10 (3) cm), the number and arrangement of which and the absence or presence 
of a plate from which they arise being used in the identification of larvae of the genus. In 
the kdes aegypti fourth instar larva there is no plate, the comb teeth form a single row of 
8-12 teeth and have well-developed basal denticles (Fig. 10 (4)). Just behind the comb at 
the posterior end of the segment are five hairs, three large and branched and two small and 
simple, named by Marshall the pentad hairs, useful as landmarks and referred to in detail 
when dealing with the chaetotaxy (Fig. 10 (3)). From above down in the figure the five 
small hairs are respectively those designated a, p, y, 6, e by Marshall. 
Projecting from the dorsal and posterior portion of abdominal segment VIII is the 
respiratory siphon. At its apex are the terminal spiracles surrounded by certain structures, 
perispiracular lobes (spl), that play an important role in respiration and are described in 
detail later. On the posterior aspect of the respiratory siphon in its basal half are two 
slightly diverging lines of spines, pecten teeth (Fig. 10 (5)), constituting the pecten (pet). 
A little apical and internal to each line of pecten teeth is the siphon hair (sh). In A. aegypti 
above each line there is one hair, characteristic of certain genera, the genus Culex 
having several such hairs. Certain characteristics of the siphon are of importance in 
identification : the proportion of length to diameter at the base, siphonic index, the number 
and character of the pecten teeth and the situation and number of branches of the hair tuft 
or tufts. In A. aegypti larva in the fourth instar the siphonic index is slightly above 2, the 
pecten teeth number 12-20 and the siphon hair is single with from 3 to 5 branches. 
Ventral to the siphon and at an angle to the rest of the abdomen is the small anal 
segment (A) with the opening of the anus terminally, around which are the four trans- 
parent finger-like anal papillae (Ap), two dorsal and two ventral. The anal segment carries 
dorsally a saddle-shaped plate, dorsal plate (Adp), which increases in proportionate size 
with each successive instar, until in the fourth instar it forms a cuff-like plate nearly sur- 
196 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
rounding the segment. Towards the posterior end on each side of the dorsal plate, or on 
the membrane beyond this in early instars, is the saddle hair (Ash), in A. aegypti small and 
usually bifid. Just posterior to the dorsal plate in the middle line dorsally and at the apex 
of the segment is a heavily chitinised plate formed from the fused basal plates of two pairs 
of the long dorsal or caudal hairs (Fig. 10 (3) Adh; (6)). The outer hairs are longer and 
unbranched whilst the inner and somewhat more dorsal hairs are branched. On the ventral 
aspect of the segment towards its posterior end is the ventralfan (cr). This is not present in 
the first instar, but becomes more and more developed at each successive instar. The hairs 
forming the fan, cratal tufts of Marshall, are mainly two-branched and arise from chitinised 
bases with thickenings passing from these, the hairs alternating to form a row on either side 
of the middle line (Fig. 10 (7)). In front of the fan are some hairs (usually two) without 
thickened bases (cr’). * In A. aegypti the number of cratal tufts is usually four in each row. 
In life the larva at rest at the surface carries the anal segment projecting backwards at an 
angle slightly above the horizontal. It is possible that with the dorsal hairs and ventral 
fan it plays some part in stabilising the insect. As long ago figured by Howard (1901), the 
outer dorsal hairs in the living larva diverge laterally at an angle of about 60”. 
(b) THE HEAD CAPSULE AND RELATED STRUCTURES 
THE HEAD CAPSULE (Fig. 11) 
Of the many authors who have described or referred to the head capsule of the mosquito 
larva it will suffice to mention: Thompson (1905), whose paper entitled ‘The alimentary 
system of the mosquito’ contains much detailed information on the head capsule; Martini 
(1929), who devotes sixteen pages of his article on Culicidae in Lindner to the head of the 
larva ; Puri (193 l), who gives a very complete and detailed account in his monograph of 
the head of the Anopheles larva and who discusses the segmental relations of the parts; 
Salem (193 I), whose important paper dealing especially with labral structures in the larva 
of AFdes aegypti is one of the most detailed morphological studies of the head parts in the 
literature; and Crawford (1933), who writes specifically on the head of some anopheline 
larvae. In addition are authors already mentioned as describing the larva. Whilst the 
general characters of the head capsule of the mosquito larva are well known and parts are 
named with more or less uniformity by authors, there is still a certain amount of uncertainty 
about some of the parts and room for more detailed description of others. 
The structures composing the head capsule are shown in the accompanying figures. In its 
posterior portion the capsule forms an almost complete box, its cavity opening into the 
neck through the relatively narrow and almost circular occipital foramen (of), surrounding 
which is a thickened collar-like rim, cervical collar (cc). Anteriorly and ventrally the head 
capsule is largely closed in by soft structures and is much fenestrated for accommodation 
of the labral and gnathal parts. Starting from a narrow gap in the mid-line of the collar 
dorsally are two diverging lines of suture, which have the appearance of being the Y-shaped 
arms of the epicranial suture of the generalised insect head and which are lines of weakness 
at ecdysis along which the head capsule splits. These lines, which may provisionally be 
termed the frontal sutures (fs), pass forward on each side of the dorsum of the head 
* According to Mattingly (in lit.) absence of precratal tufts is diagnostic of the subgenus 
some aberrant forms. The extra hairs referred to have not the characters of true tuft hairs. Stegm2yia except in 
I97 
THE LARVA 
internal to the larval eyes to the inner side of each antenna1 prominence (AP), that is the 
lateral portion of the head capsule where this projects on either side to form a prominence 
from which the antennae arise. These two lines of suture demarcate between them a broad 
convex median area of the dorsum of the head which at ecdysis is pushed up in a flap-like 
fashion to allow passage of the head of the succeeding instar and which for reasons given 
later will be considered to befrons (F). In the posterior portions of their course the frontal 
sutures appear only as faint lines of suture, but anteriorly the outer lamella of the suture 
becomes increasingly developed as an internally directed chitinous crescentic flange which 
has been named by Thompson from its appearance the scythe-shaped thickening and may 
be termed the falciform apodeme (fa). This has the appearance of being the result of the 
antenna1 prominence, as it nears the base of the antenna, being pressed against the more 
median portion of the head capsule, so that the two walls in the area of contact have 
become an apodeme (Fig. 11 (1)). 
The smooth median dorsal surface of the head described as frons is continued forwards 
without break or interruption beyond the level of the bases of the antennae to the front of 
the head, such portion being considered to be clypeus (CL). The whole area from the collar 
forwards forms a rather expanded and balloonedfronto-clypeus. The clypeal portion termi- 
nates anteriorly at a narrow transverse bar, the preclypeus (PC), lying at the extreme front 
of the head and carrying, in practically all culicine larvae, the small curved preclypeal hairs. 
Though often regarded merely as part of the clypeus, the preclypeus is a distinct morpho- 
logical structure as will be shown later. It is separated from the clypeus by a line of 
thickening, the clypeo-Zabral suture of Salem. 
External to the frontal suture on each side is a broad expanse of surface extending 
over the lateral aspects of the head and well on to the ventral surface. Assuming that the 
frontal sutures are branches of the epicranial suture, these areas would be the epicranial 
plates of the generalised insect head. They are most conveniently on each side termed the 
gena (G). Anteriorly each gena is continued into the antenna1 prominence. On the most 
prominent part of each gena and just on the mid-dorso-ventral line is the larval ocellus (oc), 
formed of a cluster of five pigmented ommatidia. In the fourth instar, in addition, are the 
Figure 11. The head capsule. 
Head capsule of fourth instar larva. Dorsal view. The dotted outlines and figures indicate 
insertion areas of head muscles numbered as given later under the muscular system. 
Ventral view of same. 
Posterior view. 
Lateral view. 
Lettering : AP, antenna1 prominence ; an, antenna; ap, flabellar apodeme; ap’, anterior arm of 
same; bs, black spot area; CL, clypeus; cc, cervical collar; ep, epipharynx; ep’, epipharyngeal 
spines; ep”, epipharyngeal hairs; epl, post-epipharyngeal lobe; F, frons; fa, falciform apodeme; 
fb, flabellum; fb’, flabellar plate; fb”, scallop ; fs, frontal suture; G, gena; H, hypostomal area ; 
hs, hypostomal suture; L’, labial area ; Zp, lateral plate of clypeus; MO, mouth; md, mandible; 
mdo, fenestra for articulation of mandible and maxilla; ms, mental sclerite; mx, maxilla; mxp, 
maxillary palp ; oc, ocellus ; of, occipital foramen ; om, compound eye ; P, pharynx ; PC, preclypeus ; 
p, palatum ; pe, epipharyngeal bar ; pp, postpalatal bar ; ppl, postpalatal lobe ; sma, submaxillary 
apodeme ; ST, stirrup apodeme ; sr’, point of involution of same; ss, suspensorium; ss’, lateral 
oral apodeme ; T, tentorium ; T’, anterior portion of same ; tm, tessellated membrane ; tp, tentorial 
pit. 
198 
1 05mm. I 
hs 
3 
Figure 11 
I99 
THE LARVA 
developing compound eyes of the future adult (om) showing through the cuticle. These 
commence as narrow eyebrow-like crescentic areas anterior to the ocelli and gradually 
increase in size by the addition of new ommatidia on their anterior periphery until they 
form large semilunar areas completely subordinating the ocelli which lie behind them 
(Fig. 11 (4) om). Th e compound eyes are not, however, organs of the larva at all, but of the 
future imago, and leave no mark on the cast skin of the head after ecdysis. Posteriorly the 
genae form rounded shoulder-like angles very characteristic of the mosquito larva. These 
are the areas which give origin internally to most of the muscles moving the mandibles and 
maxillae. 
Passing to the ventral aspect of the head we find this sharply divided into distinct 
portions, namely an anterior or Zabral area with complicated apodemes and other 
structures including the feeding brushes; an intermediate area, which may be termed the 
gnathal area, giving insertion for the mandibles and maxillae; and an extensive smooth 
posterior area. This smooth posterior portion is formed laterally by the ventral extensions 
of the genae, which internal to the submaxillary apodeme form the hypostomal areas (23). 
Between the hypostomal areas is a median area, the labial area (L’), marked off by well- 
defined sutures, the hypostomal sutures (hs). This median area is bounded anteriorly by a 
conspicuous triangular toothed structure, the mental sclerite (ms). In the later stages of 
larval development there lies beneath it the complicated developing labial rudiment. The 
following is a more detailed description of these different areas. 
The Zabral area consists dorsally of the preclypeus (Fig. 12 (1) PC). The extent laterally 
of this structure is difficult to define with certainty, but it appears to extend sufficiently far 
to encircle on their outer side the areas from which the feeding brushes take origin and to 
end in a conspicuous wrinkled projection on the inner aspect of the head (Fig. 11 (2) Zp). 
These projections appear to be the upper processes of the lateral plates of Salem. Each 
carries a few hairs like those of the feeding brushes. More or less surrounded by the 
lateral extensions of the preclypeus are the structures at the base of the feeding brushes. 
Anteriorly extending from the border of the preclypeus is a peculiar bossed membrane, 
tesellated membrane (tm). Between the two tessellated membranes in the middle line is the 
projecting hairy lobe termedpalatum by Thompson (p). Passing more ventrally in continua- 
tion of the tessellated membranes are the oval basal plates of the JlabeZZa from which rise 
the hairs forming the feeding brushes or JlabeZZa, and between these and the flabella! 
apodemes (ap) is the peculiar corrugated structure which from its resemblance to a scallop 
Figure 12. Clypeal and labral structure of larva. 
1 Showing dorsal view of preclypeal and clypeal hairs.* 
2 Flabellar plate and apodemes associated with same. In position with feeding brushes extended. 
Hairs of plate are not shown. 
3 Right flabellum and apodeme. The numbers 1, 2 and 3 indicate hairs of the inner, middle and 
outer portion respectively. 
4 Showing relation of parts. 
5 Showing position of parts with the feeding brushes retracted. 
6 Showing parts of epipharynx. 
7 Terminal portion of hair from inner series of flabellar hairs. 
For lettering see under Fig. 11. 
* For names of head hairs, see Table 9, p. 211. 
@l mm. 
I J v 3 
O-1 mm. 
5 I I Olmm. , 
Figure 12 
THE LARVA 
shell I have termed the scallop (fb”). Behind the palatum is an area of membrane forming 
a cushion-like lobe, post-palatal lobe (ppl), crossed by a sclerotised bar,post-palatal bar (pp), 
connecting the bases of the flabella. Behind the post-palatal lobe is another bar, the epi- 
pharyngeal bar (pe), which with the epipharyngeal spines (ep’) and the epipharyngeal hairs 
(ep”) constitutes the epipharynx (ep). Still further back behind the epipharynx is the 
post-epipharyngeal lobe (epl), that overhangs like an upper lip the broad opening (true 
mouth) into the pharynx. It is capable of being retracted when the pharynx is functioning 
by muscles arising from the dorsum of the head. The lobe, with the epipharynx, forms the 
roof of a cavity closed in below by the mandibles and maxillae, the preoral cavity, which 
opens behind into the pharynx by a broad slit-like opening, the true mouth, that is the 
original stomodaeal opening. Though this at rest is slit-like it is widely expanded during the 
act of feeding, the preoral cavity, true mouth and pharynx forming an almost continuous 
cave-like passage into the head. Views from the ventral or dorsal aspect give a very im- 
perfect idea of the nature of the larval mouth, which as it would appear from the front 
and sides is shown in Figs. 17 (2) and 11 (4) (MO). 
Behind the turned-in edges of the preclypeus there pass inwards the heavily sclerotised 
smooth edges of the clypeus, forming on each side of the head a buttress-like projection on 
which is a peculiar black mark present apparently in all culicine larvae and very appro- 
priately named by Thompson the black spot area (bs). From this there extends a stout 
process passing to and giving support to the complicated system of apodemes of the 
feeding brushes described later. From the same black spot area there extends a strong 
chitinous bar (ss) passing backwards and inwards to the structures lying behind the mental 
sclerite. This forms a lip-like lower edge to the pharyngeal opening and gives membranous 
attachment to the dorsal basal edge of the mandible of its side. The bar clearly represents 
the suspensorium of the generalised insect head. At the outer end of the bar where it joins 
the turned-in edge of the clypeus forming the black spot area is the funnel-shaped opening 
of the anterior arm of the tentorium described later. 
Posterior to the suspensoria and forming what has been termed the gnathal area is on 
either side a large fenestrated opening (mdo). This opening by its edges gives attachment to 
both mandible and maxilla. The anterior edge is formed by the suspensorium and gives 
attachment only to the dorsal edge of the base of the mandible. Posteriorly the openings 
are limited by the sharp sinuous edges of the genae. About the middle of this edge on each 
side is a strong spur-like process continued as a partially apodematous thickening on to the 
ventral surface of the gena, submaxillary apodeme (sma). This process forms the main articu- 
lation both for mandible and maxilla, which are otherwise almost entirely connected 
with the head capsule by membrane only. At this point there arises the maxillary palp, with 
its small basal crescentic sclerite bearing a hair as described later. The fact that the palp 
arises in this position and that the hypoderm lying between the submaxillary apodeme and 
hypostomal suture as far back as the tentorial pit near the cervical collar is included in the 
area of the developing maxillary rudiment shows that the structure designated the maxilla 
in the larva represents only such part of this appendage as is apical to the maxillary palp 
and that the more basal parts (cardo and stipes) are unrepresented except in the hypoderm. 
In other words the bases of the maxillae in the larva really extend, as in the adult, practic- 
ally to the occipital foramen forming the hypostomal area (ET). 
The smooth convex median plate between the hypostomal sutures we have termed the 
labial area. Anteriorly this terminates in the mental sclerite. Posteriorly on either side at 
202 
THE HEAD CAPSULE 
the ends of the sutures are the posterior tentorial pits (tp), indicating the points near the 
cervical collar where the posterior arms of the tentorium join the head capsule. The mental 
sclerite in AL;des aegypti is of the usual triangular shape with, in the fourth instar, 12-13 
teeth on either side of the median tooth, the outer three or four teeth being larger and more 
widely spaced than the inner ones. Though a striking structure in the larva, the mental 
sclerite appears to have no great morphological significance, being cast with the larval skin 
and leaving no particular effect upon the hypoderm. Lying ventrally at the base of the 
mental sclerite is a less conspicuous fold of the cuticle carrying a fringe of peculiar flattened 
fimbriated hairs. 
Lying within the head is the phragmatic structure, the tentorium (Fig. 11 (2) T’, T). This 
consists of a spur-like process projecting inwards from each of the posterior tentorial pits, 
posterior arm, from the termination of which there passes a narrow tubular strand opening 
at the anterior tentorial pit of its side, anterior arm (T’). From the point of the spur there 
arise certain small muscles of the head among which in Culexpipiens is the long thin 
antenna1 muscle. In A5des aegypti, where the antenna is very poorly developed, this muscle 
is very small and appears to arise only from the shaft of the anterior arm. 
Before leaving the description of the head capsule proper a word may be said regarding the 
structures frons, clypeus and preclypeus, as also a further brief reference to the tentorium. 
Embryologically the parts in front of the antenna1 bases are all formed from the everted 
precephalic groove, that is, the deep median longitudinal groove which at a certain stage 
of development is everted at the anterior end of the embryo to form a conspicuous bulbous 
mass (see ch. VII). The ventral surface of this mass becomes the epipharyngeal area. On it 
laterally are the brush rudiments looking rather like the disks on the head of a tapeworm, 
and connecting these on the dorsal surface is an inverted heart-shaped area, picked out 
conspicuously by its special cellular structure, which becomes the preclypeus. The surface 
of the embryo posterior to this area as far back as the antenna1 lobes becomes what has 
here been given as clypeus. There is also the anatomical arrangement of parts to support 
the above conclusion. Snodgrass (1935, p. 110) notes that a facial suture that contains the 
anterior tentorial pits is usually to be identified as the epistomal suture, that is the suture 
between the clypeus and the frons. As already noted the anterior arm of the tentorium 
opens just internal to the falciform apodeme at the point where the dorsal surface of the 
head is continued on to the black spot area. If at this level there had been an epistomal 
suture crossing the dorsal surface, it would be reasonable to term that part of the dorsum 
behind it frons, and that in front clypeus. Further, the whole ballooned area of the larval 
dorsal head surface, ballooned to accommodate the vitally important and large pharynx 
(on which as we shall see the whole life of the larva depends), shrinks in the adult to a small 
insignificant area more in keeping with the usual appearance of the frons in the insect head. 
The preclypeus, both from its anatomical relations and its development, would therefore 
appear to be part of the labrum. 
THE FEEDING BRUSHES AND THEIR APODEMES (Fig. 12) 
These have been described by Salem, though knowledge of their essential structure and 
mode of action is still incomplete. Each brush or jlabellum consists of long specialised 
hairs arising from an elongate oval plaque, jlabellar plaque (fb’). Each flabellar plaque 
somewhat resembles in appearance an oval mat of chain mail, due to the regular arrange- 
ment of the complicated ridge thickenings giving attachment to the swivel-like basal 
203 
THE LARVA 
attachments of the brush hairs. Of these hairs there are at least some 50-60 transverse 
rows, each row carrying at least 25 hairs, thus making a total of at least 1000 hairs per 
flabellum. The hairs are about 3-4 i_~ in diameter and are therefore far coarser than the 
fine pharyngeal fringe hairs which are the real filtering mechanism. It seems certain that it 
is not the function of the flabella to entangle food, but to direct a current into the pharynx 
where the filtering is done. The hairs in Ai;des aegypti larva in the outer region of the 
brush are simple and filamentous, but those towards the inner end are much thicker and, 
as noted by Salem, are toothed like a comb at the ends, much as in carnivorous larvae. 
The minute structure of the brushes has been studied by me chiefly in Culexpipiens, but in 
all essentials the brushes of AL;des aegypti appear similar, except that in Culex pipiens all 
the hairs are equal and simple. Each hair at its base has a flattened spear-like head articu- 
lated by its point with the plaque ridges (Fig. 12 (3)). The arrangement is extremely regular 
and each hair base is connected with its neighbours by means of small cross-bars in the 
basal plaque, apparently to ensure co-ordinate movement. The form taken by the brush is 
entirely a matter of the state of the plaque. If this is concave or cupped, the hairs tend to 
come together in a point. Conversely convexity of the plaque causes the hairs to radiate 
widely. Movement of the hairs in feeding is further strictly co-ordinated, each row in 
succession rising, becoming erect and falling in regular order and sequence. 
The plaques are not attached directly, except at their outer ends, to the preclypeus, but 
are for the greater part of their external border joined to this structure by the tessellated 
membrane (tm). This membrane is covered with block-like thickenings much as might be 
a fabric covered with bead work. It is not very apparent when the brushes are erected, 
but shows an extensive area between these and the preclypeus, widening medianly and 
merging with the palatum when the brushes are flexed. As regards the plaques, each is 
attached externally by its end to the encircling lateral extension of the preclypeus and at 
this attachment is relatively fixed. Its inner and anterior end is attached by a ligament to 
the point of the finger-like apodeme to be described shortly, which apodeme is freely 
moveable and capable of being dragged down and inwards by the flabellar muscles. Hence 
the flabellar plate relatively fixed at its outer end, though allowed some hinge-like move- 
ment, can be dragged down through an angle approaching 90” by its apodeme, dragging 
with it the tessellated membrane (Fig. 12 (5)). 
Extending inwards from the inner border of the plaque is a smooth dark and wrinkled 
sheet of thickened membrane which lies over, and by its inner margin is joined to, the 
apodeme. This sheet is described by Salem as part of the plaque. It seems desirable, how- 
ever, to consider the plaque with its peculiar structure as distinct. The dark wrinkled 
membrane might well from its appearance be termed the scallop (fb”). It seems to be of an 
elastic nature. It is all the more desirable to give at least descriptive names to these various 
structures, since they occur with little variation seemingly through most if not all the 
Culicini, the parts here described being almost identical with those in C. pipiens. 
The apodeme spoken of above is a conspicuous heavily sclerotised structure lying along 
the inner side of the turned-in edge of the clypeus and flabellar plaque. Its appearance and 
connections can best be seen from the figures. Anteriorly it is continued forwards as a 
partly superficial and partly deep-lying extension to form the finger-like apodeme already 
referred to. Its thickened middle portion is partly overlaid by the scallop. Its posterior end 
is continued back to link up, through an intermediate small triangular plate bearing a hair, 
with the powerful spur coming from the black spot area. Just internal to this junction on 
204 
THE HEAD CAPSULE 
the adjoining membrane is a little spicular area which marks the position of a deep invagi- 
nation leading to another and quite independent apodeme, which from its characteristic 
appearance may be termed the stirrup apodeme (Fig. 12 (2) sr). 
The main apodeme consists essentially of several involuted folds of cuticle turned in 
along the margin of the flabellar complex and flanking the median membranous area. The 
stirrup lies deeper. It has one termination, the more dorsal, thickened to form a knob- 
like head. The other end is pointed and roughened. Though no doubt connected indirectly 
there is no obvious linking of the stirrup apodeme with the flabellar apodeme. Curiously 
enough none of the structures described, except the stirrup apodeme, receive the insertion 
of any muscles concerned in the movement of the brushes. The muscles moving these 
structures are, as will be seen, the inner and outer retractors of the flabella, by far the 
largest and most massive muscles of the head. These two muscles are inserted into the ends 
of the stirrup apodeme, the large median (inner) retractor into the head and the outer 
retractor into the more ventrally lying pointed end. The action of these muscles in retracting 
the brushes is not difficult to understand. By their contraction the whole flabellar complex 
is dragged backwards and inwards and so into the shelter of the preoral cavity, the flabellar 
plaques being made concave and the brushes brought to points. Whilst this, however, 
accounts for the dragging down of the brushes in this way it does not explain, as is noted by 
Thompson, how the characteristic movement of these structures in feeding is brought about. 
Between the two flabellar apodemes, crossing the membrane behind the palatum is a 
chitinous bar, in part apodematous, post-palatal bar (pp), which links the two apodemes 
and indirectly the two flabellar plaques together. Posterior to this is the area of membrane 
carrying the epipharyngeal structures and posterior again to the epipharyngeal spines is a 
long narrow chitinous band passing from near the posterior end of one flabellar apodeme 
to the other. Into the middle of this is inserted the small muscle (no. 4) which takes origin 
from the dorsum of the head. The band may be termed the post-epipharyngeal bar (pe). 
Still further back is the large expanse of membrane forming the post-epipharyngeal lobe. 
All these structures constitute the roof of the preoral cavity. 
THE LARVAL MOUTHPARTS (Fig.13) 
A large part of the under-surface of the anterior region of the head, that is especially 
the extensive area of membrane forming the post-epipharyngeal lobe, forms the roof of 
what becomes a cavity when closed in below by the mandibles, maxillae and intervening 
structures. This, however, is not correctly the oral cavity, the true mouth being the opening 
of the original stomodaeum which in this case is the entrance to the pharynx, the closed-in 
space referred to being thepreoral cavity. This receives posteriorly the wide slit-like opening 
of the pharynx, the true mouth. The floor is mainly formed by the dorsal surfaces of the 
mandibles and to a limited extent by the maxillae and in the middle line by the dorsal 
surface of the mental sclerite and the parts lying behind this (Fig. 25 (2), p .228). Excluding 
the labrum, the mouth parts consist of the mandibles, the maxillae and a small rudiment 
behind the mental sclerite representing the undeveloped Zabium and hypopharynx. 
The characters of the mandibles and maxillae in a number of species of mosquito have 
been figured by Howard, Dyar and Knab. Those of kdes aegypti have been figured by 
Salem and dorsal and ventral views of these organs given in Fig. 13 sufficiently indicate 
their structure. As already noted the bases of both mandibles and maxillae are accom- 
modated in the same openings in the head capsule and except for membranous connections 
205 
THE LARVA 
they are articulated with the capsule by a single common point of attachment, namely with 
the spur-like process about the middle of the genal edge which is a continuation of the line 
of submaxillary apodeme (sma). Here mandible, maxillary palp and maxilla are all articu- 
lated (Fig. 13 (I), (3) a). In the case of the maxilla there is a further connection, namely 
a narrow, only slightly sclerotised process on the inner ventral surface which connects with 
the upper end of the hypostomal suture near the angles of the mental sclerite (Fig. 13 (3) b). 
There is also an inconspicuous process on the dorsal surface ending in membrane 
(Fig. 13 (4) c). 
Of the various structures characterising the mandible may be noted the conspicuous 
comb-like fringes, the function of which would appear to be combing the brushes. Internal 
to these are the strongly sclerotised mandibular teeth and behind these the peculiar molar 
lobe (mp), which when the organ is adducted lies in the hollow pouch on either side of the 
labial plate. Unlike the mandibles of many insects those of the mosquito as shown in 
A. aegypti are rather thin plate-like structures. Apart from the retractors of the flabella 
the largest muscles of the head are inserted by a cornmon tendon into the base of the 
mandible towards its inner aspect (Fig. 13 (1) adt). 
The maxillae are also somewhat plate-like, though not so markedly as the mandibles. 
The most conspicuous feature of the maxilla of A. aegypti is the large brush of hairs at its 
apex. The ventral surface is relatively smooth, but the dorsal surface has a spinose lobe 
and internal to this a hairy area. There is a thickened ridge on the dorsal surface passing 
from the articulation with the hypostomal process to the apex of the organ. This passes 
between the spinose lobe and the rest of the maxilla. At the apex is a single or double 
conspicuous hair, but in A. aegypti there is no hair on the ventral face which is apparently 
the maxillary hair of authors. Close to the outer aspect of the base arises the maxillary 
palp carrying some small apical soft papillae. Below the origin of the maxillary palp and 
proximal to the maxilla is a small triangular sclerite bearing a hair, possibly the palpiger. 
As already noted what is usually described as the maxilla is only the apical portion of this 
structure; the more proximal parts are here considered to form the hypostomal area as 
previously described. 
The Zabium in the larva is completely undeveloped and exists only as a small, but extremely 
complex-looking strongly chitinised small oval plate situated behind the mental sclerite and 
comprised in a chitinised sheet formed by the expanded ends of the suspensoria (Fig. ll(2)). 
The plate has been figured for several species of mosquito by Marshall (1938). Its 
Figure 13. Mandible, maxilla and labial rudiment. 
1 Right mandible. Ventral view. a, point of articulation. External to this is an extensive mem- 
branous area. 
2 The same, dorsal view. This surface forms the floor of the preoral cavity. 
3 Right maxilla and maxillary palp. Ventral view. a, main point of articulation as for mandible 
at anterior end of submaxillary apodeme ; b, inner subsidiary attachment at hypostomal suture. 
4 Right maxilla and maxillary palp. Dorsal view. c, roughened thickening forming accessory 
attachment on dorsal aspect of base. 
5 Mental sclerite. Fourth instar. 
6 Labial and hypopharyngeal rudiment. 
Lettering: adt, adductor tendon of mandible; an, base of antenna; bs, black spot; hs, hypostomal 
suture ; mp, molar process of mandible ; sd’, opening of salivary duct ; sma, submaxillary apodeme ; 
T, tentorium. 
t* . 
I 
sd' . . 
Figure 13 
207 
THE LARVA 
appearance in A. aegypti has been figured by Salem and is shown in Fig. 13 (6). It appears 
very complicated, but actually it seems to consist mainly of two closely approximated 
conical prominences carrying on their apical membranous apex three small sensory papillae, 
one double, very like those carried by the maxillary palpi. There seems little doubt that 
these represent the labial palpi. At the base of the prominences laterally are some peculiar 
toothed ridges. Beneath the plate are the actively developing labial parts of the pupa, which 
quickly become very large, occupying a considerable space behind the submaxillary area. 
Dorsal to the labial plate (Fig. 13 (6)) is a quadrangular area of chitinisation lying 
between the ends of the suspensoria with, on each side, near the labial plate, a large sensory 
papilla between which in the middle line is the opening of the common salivary duct (sd’). 
The plate represents the hypopharynx and lies just before the entrance to the pharynx. 
On each side it forms the inner wall of a pocket lying behind the corners of the mental 
sclerite in which in adduction the molar process of the mandible lies. 
(c) THORACIC AND ABDOMINAL SEGMENTS 
THORACIC SEGMENTATION 
In the first instar following hatching the three thoracic segments, pro-, meso- and meta- 
thorax, are clearly marked off by deep indentations (Fig. 9 (7)). In later stages these 
segments are compacted to form a single more or less globular mass. The limits of the 
segments, however, are still indicated by the thoracic hairs and in the case of the last two 
segments by the position of the puncta or dark spots indicating the position of the 
repressed spiracles, as also by marks on the surface made by the insertion of muscles, even 
by slight folds in the cuticle and appearances given by lobes of the parietal layer of fat- 
body shining through the transparent cuticle. It is characteristic of the larva of A&!es 
aegypti that, apart from the relatively small basal plates of some hairs, there are no cuticular 
sclerites indicating the segments. 
The surface indications given by the above features show clearly that the greater part of 
the larval thorax is mesothorax (Fig. 15 (I), (2)), there being only a relatively narrow strip 
of prothorax anterior to this and a somewhat more extensive but tapering portion ascribable 
to the metathorax. This is of some importance in judging of the relation to segmentation 
of internal organs, tracheae, etc. 
THE ABDOMINAL SEGMENTS 
The abdominal segments, apart from those forming the terminal portion of the abdomen, 
are, like those of the thorax, entirely devoid of sclerotised plates other than hair bases. 
The limits of the segments are, however, well defined by folds of the integument. Usually 
at each intersegment are two dominant folds or creases, an anterior and a posterior, the 
anterior fold marking the limit of the more anterior segment being usually the more 
strongly marked and even reinforced by a narrow line of thickening. The two folds mark 
off between them a fairly broad intersegmental area. They correspond to some extent to 
the lines at which in many insects the segments are telescoped, the line in front corre- 
sponding to the posterior edge of the foremost segment and the second line to that at which 
208 
THORACIC AND ABDOMINAL SEGMENTS 
the intersegmental membrane is reflected backwards. Usually in the larva there is no 
telescoping and the intersegment stands out as a slightly bulging annular ring, lying 
between the broader bulges of the segments. It is into the lines and especially the posterior 
line that the intersegmental muscles take their origin and are inserted. 
Segments l-7 are all approximately similar in shape being cylindrical or somewhat 
flattened dorso-ventrally and bulging laterally a little posterior to their middle where the 
lateral hairs take origin. In size they increase from 1 to 3 and then gradually diminish in 
size to segment 7, which is the smallest segment apart from the still smaller eighth segment 
to be described. Each segment towards its anterior end carries laterally the small dark spot 
indicating the position of the repressed spiracle (Fig. 10 (1); Fig. 15 st”) and such repre- 
sentatives of the lateral and other hairs as are denoted in the section on chaetotaxy. 
The eighth segment in general resembles the preceding segments except that, besides 
differences in chaetotaxy, it carries on either side towards its posterior border the row of 
spinose scales forming the comb. As in almost all species of Ai;des the comb in A. aegypti 
is devoid of any chitinous plate from which the spines arise. The comb teeth have been 
figured by Macfie and are shown in Fig. 10 (4). On each side of the median spine is a spine 
of almost equal thickness behind which are a variable number of much finer spines. The 
comb scale is symmetrical whereas the somewhat similar pecten scale has asymmetrical 
denticles, these being present in the main only on the proximal side of the main spine 
(Fig. 10 (5)). The pentad hairs are a conspicuous feature of the segment. Of these branched 
hairs 1 and 5 are situated a little beyond either end of the comb opposite the siphon and 
anal segment respectively, whilst 3 is behind the comb about its middle and half way be- 
tween the siphon and anal segment. The two small simple hairs 2 and 4 are situated a little 
ventral of 1 and 3 respectively. Between the eighth and the succeeding anal segment is a 
fairly broad intersegmental area. 
The anal segment is largely composite since at its base in the hypoderm there develops 
the ninth sternite and from its more distal parts are eventually derived the tenth segment 
and cerci of the adult. The caudal hairs, four in number, are arranged in two pairs, an 
inner and an outer, the hairs of each side arising close together from a convex rounded 
half of the fused basal plates. The outer hair is unbranched (or sometimes double) and 
longer than the two to four branched inner hair. The plate receives muscular insertions 
and there are large basal cells well displayed in the transparent newly ecdysed fourth instar 
larva. The hairs of the ventral fan a short distance from their bases divide into about three 
branches which for the most part continue without division. 
The anal papillae, as shown by Wigglesworth (1933), are not gills but an adaptation to 
meet the physiological need for osmotic regulation of the haemolymph as described in 
chapter XXXI when describing the physiology of the larva. In the mature larva the papillae 
measure about 0.75 mm. in length. They taper towards their free end and are constricted 
at the base, where there is often a narrow ring of dark chitin and at which point they are 
very readily detached in manipulations. 
(d) THE LARVAL CHAETOTAXY 
The larval chaetotaxy has been much studied and modifications in numbering of the hairs 
by different systems are apt to be confusing. A few words therefore of explanation of these 
systems is desirable before giving the notation here used for A. aegypti. 
I4 209 CH 
THE LARVA 
The numbers given by Martini (1923) to the larval hairs of Anopheles have been found 
also applicable to those of mosquitoes generally and with some modification by Puri and 
others have been widely used. A particularly clear statement of this modified numbering 
has been given by Marshall, which will be useful when discussing more recent nomen- 
clature. The work of Knight and Chamberlain (1948) on the pupal chaetotaxy of a large 
number of genera, and that of Baisas and Pagayon (1949) and of Belkin (195 l-3) in deter- 
mining the homologies between the larval and pupal chaetotaxy, has, however, raised the 
question of possible changes in Martini’s system to fit the homologies shown. Such 
determinations have been based chiefly on the position of the developing pupal hairs as seen 
beneath the cuticle of the fourth instar larva before pupation, as also to some extent on the 
character of particular hairs and other considerations. 
That the larval and pupal hairs are largely homologous has been clearly shown by 
Belkin (Zoc. tit) and this author has given a notation that will serve for both the larva and 
pupa. This notation, so far as it refers to the larva, seems to differ only in some details 
from the modified Martini system. Belkin (1952) indeed would appear from his 
statement on p. 116, to have adopted, for the sake of uniformity, the modified Martini 
notation for the larva, making the necessary changes for conformity in the notation as 
applied to the pupa. The pupal notation, based on that of a large number of genera, had 
been very fully worked out by Knight and Chamberlain independent of the larva. But 
Belkin has shown that this is very easily and simply made to correspond with the notation 
as in use for the larva. Thus the numbers given by Belkin for the pupa for such a purpose 
start with 0 (corresponding to 1 of Knight and Chamberlain) and are with a few exceptions 
consistently one less than the notation of these authors (see list of pupal hairs given later 
in chapter xv). 
It will be shown later when describing the setae of the head, thorax and abdomen that 
very small modifications in the Martini notation will suffice to bring this into agreement 
with the Belkin numbering. Such agreement will be clear from the lists of hairs given in the 
following sections where the Belkin numbers are given in heavy type. (See also the accom- 
panying figures where the Belkin numbers are indicated.) 
The larval hairs in AL;des aegypti are in general poorly developed as compared with 
those of many Culicines. They can be studied in the cast skin of the fourth instar (or of 
other instars if the changes in the instars are being studied). Or the mounted whole larva 
may be used. In a dorsal or ventral view the larger lateral hairs are not well displayed, 
appearing as tufts, the characters of the individual hairs not being well shown (Fig. 15 (1)). 
In a lateral view the hairs and their relations are often better shown, especially if a suitably 
mounted bisected larva be used (see under ‘ Technique’, p. 117). In A. aegypti branching of 
most of the larger hairs is by the hair at a short distance from its base splitting up simul- 
taneously in a flat series of branches like the prongs of a table fork compressed laterally 
(Fig. 15 (3), (4)). Though an impression of multiple branching is sometimes given, even the 
largest hairs rarely divide into more than four branches. Feathering as seen in Anopheles 
does not occur. The smaller hairs are simple, bifid or 3-4 branched, the branches in the 
last case usually arising at a large angle from near the base. A certain number of larger 
lateral hairs arise from basal thickenings, but except for those from which the pleural hairs 
take origin these are mostly small and few in number compared with the condition in many 
Culicines. The hairs on the dorsal and ventral surface are mostly small, possess no basal 
plate and are inconspicuous. 
210 
LARVAL CHAETOTAXY 
CHAETOTAXY OF THE HEAD 
In all, twenty hairs are numbered by Martini and given in Marshall’s list. But omitting 
those on the antenna and maxilla which are best treated in connection with these append- 
ages the number becomes sixteen. If these sixteen are now numbered consecutively and some 
adjustment made in the sequence of the hairs 10-13, it will be seen from the accom- 
panying list of head hairs (Table 9) that the Martini numbers are in complete agreement 
with the Belkin numbers here adopted. 
Original* 
Martini 
1U 
2 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
14 
12 
15 
- 
13 
18 
20 Modified t 
Martini 
1 
la 
2 
4 
5 
6 
8 
9 
12 
10 
13 
- 
11 
14 
15 Belkin 
8 
9 
10 
11 
(:;a) 
13 
14 
15 Table 9. List of head hairs 
Edwards and Pupal 
Given hair Name of hair 
- - 
- - 
- - 
- - 
d - 
c - 
B - 
A - 
; 1 
- 1 
- - 
- 2 
- - 
- 3 
- - 
- - Inner preclypeal 
Outer preclypeal 
Inner clypeal (Anopheles) 
Outer clypeal (AnopheZes)$ 
Post clypeal 
Inner frontals 
Middle frontal 
Outer frontal 
Sutural 
Transsutural 
Supra-orbital 
Basal (AnopheZes) 
Infra-orbital 
Subgenaly 
Subbasal or postmandibular 
Postmaxillary 
Submental 
* As given by Marshall (1938) (hairs on antenna and mouth-parts omitted). 
t Renumbered as explained in the text. 
$ Possibly the small hair on the clypeus posterior to hair 1 a (Fig. 14 (2)). 
$j For remarks regarding the order of these hairs, see text. 
7 See text. 
There is a further notation for the head hairs which ought to be noted upon, namely, that 
by Edwards and Given (1928). These authors have designated certain of the head hairs that 
are important in systematic work by the letters A, B, C, d, e and f, a notation that has been 
very widely used. This notation is also indicated in the list of head hairs here given. 
In regard to pupal homologies there is little to be said, as only three of the head hairs are 
represented in the pupal chaetotaxy, namely, nos. 10, 12 and 13 of Belkin’s series corre- 
sponding respectively to hairs 1, 2 and 3 of the pupal cephalic hairs. These three hairs in 
the pupa are situated on the exposed portion of the head cuticle (ocular plate) and between 
the compound eye and the hollow of the curving pupal antenna, that is, on the genal area 
as in the larva (Fig. 42 (3) 1,2, 3, p. 357). 
The head hairs are readily identified and besides being given numbers they can be 
precisely indicated by names, which indicate their position and on this account, wherever 
this can be done, are helpful. Hair 1 a, though minute, is present in A. aegypti. Actually on 
each side in this situation there are two hairs, namely, one on the preclypeus, which has 
been taken to be hair 1 a (outer preclypeal of Puri and Marshall), and one just behind this 
on the clypeus (Fig. 12 (1)) the nature of which seems doubtful, but which may represent 
the outer clypeal present in Anopheles (hair 3 of Belkin). Hair 4 (d of Edwards and Given), 
post-clypeal, in Ai;des aegypti occupies a forward position which gives to the hairs of this 
211 14-2 
THE LARVA 
species a superficial resemblance to the clypeal hairs of Anupheles (see drawings in Fig. 14 
(3) where the hairs as given by Hopkins for certain genera are shown, the figure on the 
right being after this author’s figure for AL;des aegypti). Hairs 5, 6 and 7 are respectively 
the inner, middle and outer frontal hairs. When these are displaced it is difficult to homo- 
logise with certainty the two inner hairs and it is often considered that the middle hair B 
is the one which has advanced forwards closer to hair d (as in Hopkins’s figure for A. aegypti 
referred to). It seems here, however, to be more correct to number as though it was hair 1 
(C of Edwards and Given) which has moved forwards, as would appear to be the case from 
the position of the hairs in the earlier instars. 
Hair 8 just internal to the suture and hair 9 just external to the suture, respectively 
the sutural and transutural, are well named and defined. Hair 10, supraorbital, stands out 
in both dorsal and ventral view in profile and can scarcely be mistaken. Hair 11, basal, 
arising at the base of the antenna and present in Anopheles is not here represented. Hair 12, 
infra-orbital, would appear to be a small unbranched hair situated ventral to the developing 
compound eye and a little distance behind the posterior end of the submaxillary apodeme 
(Fig. 14 (2) hair 12). Hair 13, subbasal, or named by Puri, postmandibular, arises from the 
bulge of the head capsule beyond which the mandible is situated (Fig. 14 (2) hair 13). 
Hair 14, postmaxillary is on the hypostomal area and hair 15, submental, on the labial area. 
Whilst the above accounts for all fifteen hairs of the recognised head chaetotaxy it still 
would appear to leave one hair on the ventral surface unnoted. The hair here taken to be 
the infra-orbital is a simple hair situated just ventral to the developing compound eye 
(Fig. 14 (2) hair 12). In A. aegypti, however, there is a small trifid hair a little posterior to 
this (Fig. 14 (2) hair 12a). Which of these is the infra-orbital would therefore seem not 
certain, though the anterior simple hair fits the description better. Curiously enough it has 
been difficult to find any information on this point. Very few authors describe the hairs on 
the ventral aspect of the head. Martini’s small original figures in this respect are not very 
helpful. Marshall’s clear figure of the head with numbered hairs gives only one hair 
(hair 15) situated a little anterior to the supra-orbital hair seen in profile. Pending further 
consideration the second more posterior hair has been termed the subgenal and entered in 
the list of head hairs as no. 12a. 
CHAETOTAXY OF THE THORAX 
Each segment of the larval thorax carries on each side a number of hairs arranged for the 
most part in a line encircling the segment laterally, those in the series situated dorsally and 
ventrally being usually small, those situated more laterally being longer and reaching a 
Figure 14. Chaetotaxy of head. 
Dorsal view of head showing head hairs. On the right side the numbers relate to Martini’s and 
Marshall’s numbering of the hairs. On the left the lettering is according to Edwards and Given. 
Ventral view of head showing head hairs. These are numbered after Martini and Marshall. 
Hairs of dorsal surface of head of: A, Anopheles; B, Culex fatigans; C, At?des caspius; and 
D, A. aegypti, indicating changes in relative position of hairs. The hair d of Edwards and Given 
is shown throughout in solid black. Adapted from figures given by Hopkins. 
Dorsal view of abdominal segments I and II to show numbering of the hairs. 
Ventral view of the same. The letters st indicate the position of the spiracular puncta of the 
segments. 
For explanation of numbers see the text and list of head hairs on p. 211. 
4 
Figure 14 
213 f St 
J \“121 “/ 
10 
I1 
f St 
8 
THE LARVA 
maximum in the pleural hairs. The number of hairs in the fourth instar larva on the pro- 
thorax is 14 (O-13), on the mesothorax 14 (1-14) and on the metathorax 13 (l-l 3) 
(Fig. 15 (l), (2)). 
To simplify the numbering in Martini’s original notation Puri has made a small modifi- 
cation by which each of the pleural hair tufts is formed of the hairs 9-12, a modification 
that has been generally adopted. This has the advantage that the pleural hairs which are 
important structures and obviously homologous are similarly numbered. It fails, however, 
to give homology to the hairs 8, 14 and 8 on the respective three thoracic segments, though 
these appear homologous and were all originally given as 8 (see Fig. 15 (2)). Pending more 
precise information on the homologies of the thoracic hairs some compromise would seem 
in this case inevitable. Belkin’s numbers appear to be in accordance with Puri’s modifi- 
cation and all that seems necessary here is to indicate the position of the hairs. 
In Fig. 15 the thoracic hairs of A. aegypti fourth instar larva are given and numbered 
according to the modified scheme, which as noted is substantially also that of Belkin 
(1952). The arrangement and characters of the smaller hairs will be sufficiently evident from 
the figures. A brief description may, however, be given of the pleural hairs. These corre- 
spond with the position of the genital buds of the three pairs of legs. In both the meso- 
thorax and metathorax the hairs (9-12) arise from basal plaques which are continued into 
strongly developed spines very characteristic of the species. On the prothorax the pleural 
hairs, though also four in number, are much smaller and arise only from a simple papilli- 
form base without a spine, which is also situated more on the ventral surface. 
The characters of the basal plaques and their hairs are shown in Fig. 15. The prothoracic 
hairs consist of three medium-sized simple hairs with one small bifid hair (Fig. 15 (2)). The 
mesothoracic hairs 9-12, passing from dorsal to ventral, are (1) a large triple forked hair; 
(2) a large simple hair arising in front of a serrated ridge on the basal plaque ; (3) a large 
double forked hair; and (4) a very small hair on the posterior portion of the plaque 
(Fig. 15 (3)). The pleural hairs of the metathorax are almost exactly similar (Fig. 15 (4)). 
Hair 12 is, however, smaller and simple and hair 11 is minute but present. 
As in the case of the head hairs there are but few pupal hairs to be considered in respect 
to homologies, namely, hairs 4-7 for the prothorax, hairs 8 and 9 for the mesothorax and 
hairs 10, 11 and 12 for the metathorax. The pupal hairs 4-7 are arranged in two groups, an 
anterior (4 and 5) and a posterior (6 and 7), situated just dorsal of the basal portion of the 
curved pupal antenna. According to Belkin (1952) they are probably homologous with 
hairs l-5,4 and 5 being equivalent to 1 and 2,1 and 3 or 2 and 3, and 6 and 7 with 3 and 4, 
Figure 15. Chaetotaxy of thoracic and abdominal segments I-VII. 
Thorax and first abdominal segment, showing hairs of AFdes aegypti larva numbered in 
accordance with Martini’s system as slightly modified by Puri and Barraud. Left side dorsal. 
Right side ventral. 
Lateral view of thorax of A. aegypti, showing position of hairs numbered as in 1. 
Basal plaque of mesothoracic pleural hairs. 
Basal plaque of metathoracic pleural hairs. 
Lateral view of abdominal segments I-VII, showing position of hairs numbered after Martini. 
Hairs on segments III-VI are only shown numbered where the numbering is not obvious from 
that given on segments I and II. 
Lettering: st, spiracular puncta. 
214 
8 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 15 
THE LARVA 
4 and 0 or 4 and 5, the exact homologies being uncertain. The mesothoracic pupal hairs 8 
and 9 are situated far back on the mesonotum posterior to the trumpet, 8 being the more 
mesa1 hair, possibly homologous with larval hair 1, whilst 9 is 4 or 5. The metathorax 
(metanotal plate) of the pupa has three hairs on each side, namely, from within outwards 
10, 11 and 12, corresponding to the larval metathoracic hairs 1, 2 and 3. 
CHAETOTAXY OF THE ABDOMEN (Fig. 15(5); Fig. 16(4),(5)) 
The hairs of the abdomen in A. aegypti larva, though many are very small, accord very well 
with Martini’s and Belkin’s notations and with the pupal hairs. So far as I have been able 
to ascertain, however, the larval chaetotaxy for A. aegypti or any closely related species of 
Stegomyia has not yet been determined by actual comparison with the developing pupal 
hairs and the interpretation here given is therefore based on hair positions and characters 
only. 
The maximum possible number of hairs for a segment is 15 (hairs O-14). These are set 
out provisionally numbered in the figures noted above, with their numbers in Belkin’s 
notation. An important point drawn attention to by Belkin (1953) is that two hairs, 
termed transitory hairs, present in the fourth instar are not represented in the first instar or 
in the pupa. These were first considered to be hairs 9 and 11 (Belkin, 1952), but later 
amended to 9 and 13 (Belkin, 1953). In Anopheles freeborni hair 9 first appears in the third 
instar and 13 in the second instar, neither being present in the pupa. Both in this species, 
however, are shown present in the first segment of the abdomen of the fourth instar. In 
A. aegypti these two hairs, in the interpretation here given, are also unrepresented in 
abdomen segment I of the fourth instar, as further commented upon below. 
All fifteen hairs are normally developed and as a rule easily identified in A. aegypti on 
segments II-VI. On segment I only 11 hairs are present and allowing for the small hairs 0 
and 14 this leaves two hairs to be accounted for. These appear to be 9 and 13 (see figuring 
on 15 (1) and (5)). On segment VII most of the hairs are very small so that with some 
exceptions identification is not very certain. 
The arrangement of the hairs on the different segments is mostly very similar. Hairs O-5 
are situated dorsally; hairs 6 and 7 are usually large conspicuous lateral hairs; hairs 8 and 9 
are slightly ventral to the mid dorso-ventral line, hair 8 being anterior and hair 9 close to 
hairs 6 and 7 ; hairs 10-13 are on the ventral aspect and the position of hair 14 is described 
later. The following are brief descriptions of the hairs. 
Hair 0 is a minute simple hair situated dorsally on the anterior portion of the segment 
on each side. It is most readily seen in the mounted cast skin. It is present on segments 
II-VIII. 
Hairs l-5 show a characteristic pattern arrangement, that is, hair 1 is most internal and 
posterior, hair 2 is anterior to hair 1 and hairs 3 and 4 more or less in line towards hair 5 
which is larger and branched and situated on the outer border of the segment just internal 
and posterior to hairs 6 and 7. Hair 1 on most segments is a short branched hair. It 
increases in size on segments IV and V and on segment VII is a large bifid hair dorsally 
overhanging segment VIII and the base of the siphon. In Anopheles it forms the palmate 
hairs. Hairs 2-4 are all small and on the more anterior segments are short, bifid, trifid or 
more branched except hair 4 which is characteristically a simple hair. Hair 5 becomes a 
well-marked branched hair increasing in size to segment IV and then becoming smaller. 
216 
LARVAL CHAETOTAXY 
Hair 6 is the largest of the hairs forming the main part of the large lateral hairs. It is 
usually four branched on segment I where it rises in common with the large single hair 7 
from a small basal plate. It is much the same on segment II, but has only an indefinite 
thickening at its base. It is usually branched on III and IV, btid on segment V and simple 
but large on segment VI. On segment VII it is difficult to identify with certainty. Hair 7 
on segments I-III is a large simple, bifid or trifid large hair, but beyond becomes small, 
bifid or simple. 
Table 10. List of hairs of the terminal segments 
Notation according to 
Situation and name of hair 
Segment VIII* 
Pentad hair 1 
Pentad hair 2 
Pentad hair 3 
Pentad hair 4 
Pentad hair 5 
Siphon tube 
Siphon hair 
Apico-dorsal hair 
Stigma1 pla te (segment IX) 
Anterior lobe (sensory pits) 
Lateral lobe 
Apical papillary 
Basal papillary 
Posterior lobe? 
Dorsal surface 
Ventral surface 
Anal segment (segment X) 
Saddle hair 
Inner caudal hair 
Outer caudal hair 
Ventral fan Martini 
VIII 6 
VIII 7 
VIII 9 
VIII 11 
VIII 13 
- 
h 
VIII l-3 
VIII 4 
VIII 5 
b 
: 
e 
- 
- 
- 
- Marshall 
; 
3: 
P 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- Belkin 
1 (VIII 1) 
2 (VIII 5) 
3 (VIII 7) 
4 (VIII lo?) 
5 (VIII 12?) 
(IX 1) 
(IX 2) 
(IX 3-5) 
(IX 7) 
(IX 6) 
(IX 9?) 
(1x8) 
- 
- 
(X 1) 
o( 2) 
(X 3) 
(X 4?) 
* Also has hairs 0 and 14. 
t Martini’s lettering is shown in circles in Fig. 16 (3), (4). 
Hair 8, the pilot hair, is easily identified on segments II-VII by its position a little 
posterior to the spiracular puncta of the segment. On segment I what is taken here to be 
hair 8 is closer than usual to the lateral hairs and appears to be given as hair 9 in Anopheles 
by Belkin (1953). Its relation to the puncta (which are present on segment I) still, however, 
holds good and its rather more posterior position may well be due to the narrower segment. 
Hair 9 is a rather characteristic simple, but rather thick, hair much the same on all 
segments II-VII. It lies a little ventral to the lateral hairs. 
Hairs 10-13 usually have somewhat the same position as hairs 14 dorsally, that is, one 
hair, taken to be hair 12, lies a little anterior to the hairs 10 and 11. Hair 13 is a con- 
spicuous multi-branched hair that increases in size to a very large hair on segments IV 
and V. 
Hair 14 is one of a pair of very minute hairs situated close together on the interseg- 
mental membrane in the middle line ventrally. Like hair 0 it is best seen in the mounted 
cast skin. It is usually described as present on segments III-VIII, that is, situated on the 
anterior border of each segment on which it occurs, but in the larva it is situated on the 
2=7 
THE LARVA 
intersegmental membrane nearer the anteriorly situated segment. Its situation suggests 
that the pair of little hairs might have some function in connection with the fold of mem- 
brane in this situation. In the pupa the hairs do actually arise on the very edge of the 
thickened cuticle of the hinder segment. 
On segment VII the hairs are very small and mostly simple, except for the large hair 1. 
On segment VIII the hairs constitute the pentad hairs of Marshall. In the accompanying 
list of hairs of the terminal segments (Table 10) the notation is given for these hairs, as also 
for the hairs of the siphon and for the anal segment as given by Martini (1923), and by 
Marshall with their probable numbering on the new system as given by Belkin. For 
description of the siphon hairs see (e), and for the pentad hairs and hairs of the anal segment 
description of the larva in (a). 
(e) THE TERMINAL SPIRACLES AND 
ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES 
THE RESPIRATORY SIPHON (Fig.16) 
The respiratory siphon of the mosquito larva was first described by Haller (1878), and a 
surprisingly complete description is given by Raschke (1887), a translation of which is 
included by Howard, Dyar and Knab in their description of the parts. The corresponding 
structures in the larva of Anopheles have been very thoroughly described by Imms (1907), 
and the structure of the siphon in the culicine larva with homologies of the parts has been 
dealt with by me in a previous communication (Christophers, 1922). The most complete 
Figure 16. Showing structure of the respiratory siphon. 
Outline of respiratory siphon and parts at its base to show muscles of the siphon. These are 
shown in black as they would appear if the near (left) terminal tracheal trunk had been 
removed leaving only the right-hand muscle of each pair except muscle c where both muscles 
of the pair are shown. a-f, the six muscles a-f as given in the list of these in the text. 
For other lettering see below. 
Apical portion of siphon to show terminal portion of tracheal trunk of left side. 
Dorsal view of stigmatic plate. Figures without attached dash relate to the inner plates 
respectively of anterior (l), lateral (2) and posterior (3) perispiracular lobes. Figures with 
attached dash relate to the outer plates of these lobes in the order given. 3” indicates the soft 
membrane at the edge of the lobe. The small letters and figures in circles are hairs as named by 
Martini, this author’s hairs l-3 being those shown at so as sensory organs. 
Apex of siphon showing closure of the terminal spiracles and muscles a-e of right side. Lobes 
and hairs as in no. 3. 
The same with lobes (partially) expanded and musclef. 
Parts immediately after pupation showing median and lateral portions of the ninth tergite. 
Apical view of peristigmatic lobes in retracted position and situation of the tips of the pupal 
paddles with paddle hair. 
Lettering : A, anal segment ; al, anterior perispiracular lobe; ap, spiracular apodeme; ash, apical 
hair of siphon tube; cpt, crypts opening on tracheal trunk; fc, felt chamber; fc’, upper edge of 
same; ZZ, lateral lobe of ninth tergite (paddle) of pupa; II’, apical hair of pupal paddle (paddle 
hair) ; ml, median lobe of ninth tergite ; pl, posterior perispiracular lobe ; pmp, posterior median 
process; tsp, terminal spiracle; tt, tracheal trunk; tt’, terminal portion of tracheal trunk with fine 
taenidia; w, cells of postspiracular gland. 
218 
2 , O-1 mm. J 
3 , @l mm. 1 ’ I 
, 0-l mm. I 7 
Figure 16 
219 
THE LARVA 
description of the apical portions included in the ‘stigma1 plate’ is that by Montchadsky 
(1930) in his monographic study in which he describes and figures these parts in a large 
number of species including Ai;des aegypti (see also Montchadsky, 1924, 1926, 1927). 
A more recent paper on the structure of the siphon is that by Keilin, Tate and Vincent 
(1935) in which they describe the perispiracular glands which secrete the oily or waxy 
substance which renders the parts about the spiracular openings hydrophobic and so assures 
their functioning. A still more recent paper is that by Sautet and Audibert (1946) who 
describe the muscles of the siphon and the mechanism of the closing and opening of the 
spiracles. 
In A. aegypti fourth instar larva the main body of the siphon is a strongly sclerotised 
cylindrical tube tapering in its distal half, the siphon tube. Its length is about twice its 
breadth at the base, the siphonic index (length/diameter at base) being a little over 2. It 
arises from the posterior portion of the eighth abdominal segment at an angle of about 
140” with the line of the body (see ch. XI, ‘Hydrostatic balance’, p. 253). 
At its base the siphon tube terminates abruptly in a sharp edge which is continued around 
the base of the organ without any projecting lateral tag (acus) such as is present in many 
species, for example, in Culex pipiens. The edge ends in membrane without any articular 
connection. At its apex the siphon tube also ends abruptly in a circular sharp edge. The 
dorsal surface of the siphon tube (that facing anteriorly) is devoid of any special structures 
except close to the apex where there is on each side a small hair (Fig. 16 (4) ash), hair h of 
Martini, or apico-dorsal hair of Marshall. * On the ventral (posterior) surface in the basal 
half are the two slightly diverging lines of denticled spines forming the pecten as already 
described. These number in the fourth instar from 12-20 in each row, for the most part 
evenly spaced. A little beyond the most distal spine and a little internal to the line of 
spines is the siphon hair, usually 2-5 branched. At the apex of the siphon are the terminal 
spiracles surrounded by theperispiracular lobes, the structures as a whole being commonly 
referred to as the stigma1 plate. 
THE STIGMAL PLATE 
The parts surrounding the terminal spiracles in the larva of Anopheles are represented, so 
to speak, in miniature in the stigma1 plate of the culicine larva (Christophers, 1922). The 
structures forming the stigma1 plate in the fourth instar larva of AL;des aegypti are shown in 
Fig. 16 (3). Almost in the centre are the openings of the spiracles. These are approxi- 
mately circular in shape with thickened rather transparent edges crossed by transverse 
crinkles which give them a somewhat scalloped appearance. The openings are frequently 
referred to as stigmata, each opening being a stigma, but there seems no reason for not 
using the term spiracle as defined by Snodgrass (1935). On their inner side the rim sur- 
rounding the openings is narrower and more sclerotised and is continuous with the edges 
of the hollow structure shortly to be described as the apodeme. This arrangement binds the 
openings firmly together and ensures that, when dragged upon by the apodeme in the 
closing in of the parts, the openings are pulled in and from being in a somewhat horizontal 
plane are dragged in apposition to a more vertical one (see also Sautet and Audibert, 1946). 
Around the spiracular openings are certain more or less flap-like lobes capable of being 
opened up at the surface of the water when the spiracles are functioning and of being closed 
* For homology of the hairs of the siphon see ‘Lists of hairs of terminal segments’, p. 217. 
220 
TERMINAL SPIRACLES, ETC. 
over these when the larva submerges. These lobes are five in number, one anterior, two 
lateral and two posterior. The lobes are rather fleshy, but carry certain plates. These are 
present on both surfaces leaving the edges rather soft and rounded. Following Marshall it 
is most convenient to refer to these plates as the inner and outer plates of the respective 
lobes. The outer plate of the anterior lobe (Fig. 16 (3) 1’) is broad and half-moon-shaped, 
the inner plate (Fig. 16 (3) 1) narrower, oval anteriorly and continued posteriorly as a narrow 
bar linking up with the apodeme. This portion is dragged well into the siphon tube when 
the parts are closed (Fig. 16 (4) and (5)). On each side at the base of the fleshy lateral edge 
of the lobe are three sensory hairs present in both anopheline and culicine mosquitoes 
(hairs l-3 of Martini; Fig. 16 (3) so). The lateral lobes are papilliform in shape, the inner 
plate (2) carrying at its apex a minute, scarcely visible hair (hair no. 4 of Martini). The 
posterior lobes are somewhat triangular in shape. Their edges carry some small hairs 
(hairs b, c and, at the outer edge of the inner plate, hair d of Martini). The inner plate is 
rather densely sclerotised, rough and of an irregular shape (3). Some rather indefinite 
thickening connects it with the apodeme. The outer plate is larger and more indefinite (3’). 
It carries a small hair towards its apex and a larger hair more basally (hairs e andfrespec- 
tively of Martini). There can be little doubt that the two plates represent, taken together, 
the scoop or median plate of the Anopheles larva. Between the two posterior lobes in the 
middle line is a small upright projection picked out by its bifid character, which in certain 
conditions can project as a small lobe. It may suitably be termed the posterior median 
process (pmp). 
In the median line between the spiracles and extending back some distance between the 
inner plates of the posterior lobe is a slit-like opening the hardened edges of which connect 
up with all the other structures described and are continued into a deeply penetrating 
hollow chitinisation, the stirrup-shaped piece of Howard, Dyar and Knab and other 
authors, which will be referred to as the spiracular apodeme or shortly as the apodeme. This 
hollow projection receives the insertion of nearly all the muscles of the respiratory siphon 
and from this fact and its connections it is, so to speak, the operative structure of the 
respiratory mechanism. If dragged upon by muscles from below all the flaps are drawn 
inwards and closed over the tracheal openings, which are themselves also somewhat 
retracted into the siphon tube (Fig. 16 (4) and (7)). In the absence of such drag and at the 
water surface the flaps are pulled out by surface tension of the water into their extended 
position dragging with them the apodeme, a mechanism that can be very prettily shown as 
later described in a suitably put up detached siphon. 
THE TRACHEAL TRUNKS AND THEIR TERMINATION (Fig. 16(1)and(2)) 
In the spiracles of insects the trachea with its characteristic taenidia does not usually open 
directly at the surface of the body but into a secondary chamber, the spiracular atrium, so 
that, strictly, the external opening is that of the atria1 orifice. Very commonly too the 
atrium is specially developed and has a closing apparatus and its walls may be provided 
with felting or other filtering device for the entering air. To this plan the terminal spiracles 
of the A. aegypti larva largely conform. The large tracheal trunks, after extending through 
the length of the abdomen, enter with little change into the siphon tube and continue side 
by side up this structure to within a short distance of the apex. Here just before opening to 
the exterior at the spiracles they enter a terminal chamber, thefelt chamber of Keilin, Tate 
221 
THE LARVA 
and Vincent, the walls of which are devoid of taenidia and under a low power give a 
granular effect due to minute rnicrotrichia-like projections covering the inner surface. 
Their walls have also a certain rigidity and a rounded-off appearance which clearly dis- 
tinguishes them from the uniform tracheal trunks. The trunks, as in the abdomen, show 
fairly coarse taenidian markings, but just before entering the felt chambers their walls 
become somewhat thinner and the taenidia much finer over what appears to be an annular 
ring of more pliable wall. As noted by Raschke at this point the felt chambers when 
retracted are to some extent invaginated into the ends of the tracheal trunks proper. This 
may be seen in preparations where in varying degrees the soft annular portion of tracheal 
wall is folded, like an intussusception, over the base of the felt chamber (Fig. 16 (2)) (see 
also Sautet and Audibert, 1946). 
Associated with the terminal spiracles are thepostspiracular glands (Fig. 16 (1) w). These 
have been described in Culexpipiens and Anopheles by Keilin, Tate and Vincent. As noted 
by these authors they are most readily seen in the living culicine larva, and especially in the 
just ecdysed fourth instar larva, due to the fat globules in the gland cells. They also stain 
with soudan red or soudan black using 75 per cent alcoholic solution (see later under fat- 
body). In the AFdes aegypti larva these appear in sections as irregular agglomerations of 
cells with large nuclei enveloping the ventro-lateral region and to a less extent the distal 
dorsal parts of the felt chambers. In ventral view fat globules are also seen aggregated 
between the felt chambers along the apodeme. I have not succeeded in tracing any duct. 
The secretion of the glands is responsible for the hydrofuge character of the stigma1 plates. 
MUSCLES OF THE SIPHON (Fig. 16(l)(4)(5)) 
It seems desirable to describe briefly here the rather specialised muscles of the respiratory 
siphon in relation to the parts that have just been described rather than to deal with these 
in the general description of the muscular system of the larva given later. There are five 
pairs of what may be termed extrinsic muscles of the siphon with attachments outside this 
organ and one small intrinsic muscle proper to the siphon parts only. These six pairs are 
as follows (a-f in figures): 
Anterior series 
a, A pair of muscles arising from the dorsum of the eighth segment towards its anterior end and 
inserted into the inner side of the felt chambers anteriorly where their wall links up with the 
apodeme and with the point of the inner plate of the anterior lobe. 
b, A pair of muscles arising from the dorsum of the eighth segment towards its anterior border 
external to a and inserted into the apodeme towards its tip a little above muscle c. 
c, A pair of muscles arising from the dorsum of the eighth segment and inserted into the tip of 
the apodeme. 
Posterior series 
d, A pair of muscles arising one on each side ventro-laterally from the intersegmental line 
between the eighth and anal segments, and inserted close together in the region of the base of the 
median posterior process. The muscles pass internal to the muscular bandsf. 
e, A pair of extremely fine thread-like muscles accompanying d for much of their course but 
arising from the dorsal part of the intersegment and inserted in the hypoderm of the inner plate 
of the posterior lobe. The muscles pass external tof. 
f, A pair of short but relatively stout muscles intrinsic to the siphon. These take origin from the 
point of the apodeme and are inserted into the lowest point of the outer plate of the posterior lobe. 
They appear to be homologous with the longitudinal muscles described by Imms in Anopheles. 
222 
TERMINAL SPIRACLES, ETC. 
All except fare extremely long and thin muscles. Muscles a-c pass up in the angle left 
anteriorly by the tracheal trunks. Muscles d-e pass similarly up the siphon between the 
trunks posteriorly. It is scarcely possible to number these muscles in accordance with 
Samtleben’s numbers for the muscles of the abdominal segments 1-7, but there seems little 
doubt that muscles a-c are median members of the dorsal longitudinal intersegmental 
series of the eighth segment passing from intersegmental line 7-8 to intersegmental line 8-9. 
Muscle d may be one of the dorso-ventral series and e possibly one of the dorsal longi- 
tudinal 9-10, but no certainty can be attached to either supposition. For reference to the 
muscle series see under ‘ Muscular system of the larva’, p. 313. 
THE CHORDOTONAL ORGANS OF THE SIPHON (Fig. 35(10)(11)) 
A conspicuous feature of the siphon is the occurrence of a series of well-developed chor- 
dotonal organs. Demo11 (1917) notes that there are three pairs of chordotonal organs in 
the siphon of the Culex larva, but does not describe these. Nor does any other author 
appear to have done so. There are three, possibly four, pairs in the siphon of ASdes aegypti, 
three large passing through the whole length of the siphon and one small limited to the 
apical portion of the siphon. These are described later in the section on sensory organs of 
the larva. It seems desirable, however, briefly to record them here. The four pairs are as 
given below. 
1. A posterior pair with the basal cell attached to the membrane just below the lower margin 
of the siphon tube at a position a little internal to the row of spines of their side and with the 
filaments passing up the siphon tube posteriorly to be attached by several branches to the hypo- 
derm at the apex of the siphon tube below the posterior lobes. The filaments pass close to and are 
connected with the base of the siphon hair. 
2. A lateral pair with the basal cell attached to the membrane just below the siphon edge in 
a position a little external to the row of spines of their side. Their filaments pass up the tube 
outside the tracheal trunk of its side and enter the lateral lobes of the spiracular plate. 
3. An anterior pair passing from the anterior dorsal border of the eighth segment to the felt 
chamber of its side at the point of insertion of muscle a. 
4. A small triangular cell with one filament attached to the wall of the siphon anteriorly a 
short distance below the apical hair and two passing respectively to the upper part of the felt 
chamber and the tracheal trunk where this ends in the ring of fine taenidia. 
Two of these pairs, nos. 1 and 2, have well-marked and undoubted scolopale appearances 
at their base. The third seems undoubtedly of the same nature, but has a less distinct basal 
sense organ, and the fourth is a much smaller and more delicate structure, but appears to 
be of the chordotonal nature. 
SEGMENTAL RELATIONS OF THE TERMINAL SPIRACLES 
AND ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES 
The respiratory siphon is a peculiar structure the segmental relations of which are not at 
once apparent. In a previous communication (Christophers, 1922) I have dealt in some 
detail with the structure and development of the respiratory siphon showing that in the 
young fourth instar larva the hypoderm of this structure forms a conical protrusion of the 
shape of the siphon tube. As development proceeds the sides of this hypodermic cone are 
sheared off by fissures starting at the apex, the pieces so separated being the future pupal 
paddles. These extend through the whole length of the siphon, their apices lying beneath 
the posterior lobes of the stigma1 plate. The median portion forms a separate cone with 
223 
THE LARVA 
the spiracles at its apex. This position of the parts must not be confused with the growth of 
a genital bud arising from some point on the hypoderm and developing into an organ. 
The paddle rudiments are formed in situ from the hypoderm of the siphon tube, that is, the 
hypoderm of the sides of the siphon is what will become the paddle. The paddles of the pupa 
can be shown to be the lateral portions of the ninth tergite and the lateral wall of the siphon 
tube, so far as its hypoderm is concerned, is therefore the lateral lobe of the ninth tergite. 
The central portion left by the fissures is at the time of pupation withdrawn from the 
siphon tube, but unlike the paddle rudiments, which harden and become pupal structures, 
shrinks rapidly, though not so rapidly that in the newly emerged pupa it cannot still be 
recognised as forming a semicircular plate lying behind the eighth tergite of the pupa 
(Fig. 16 (6) ml). It can eventually in fact be traced till it forms the median portion of the 
ninth tergite in the adult. If this median portion be examined shortly after pupation, it can 
readily be seen that on its lower surface are the pits left where the cast-off tracheal trunks 
have been drawn out, and in sections the pits show what has been the tracheal epithelium 
around the cast-off trunk linings. 
It remains only to ascertain the path by which the spiracles have travelled to their 
abnormal position. They can scarcely be other than spiracles of the eighth segment which 
is the last segment to bear spiracles through the whole of the upper insects except the 
Diptera where it has been eliminated in the imago. There are no such structures in the 
higher insects as spiracles of a ninth segment. If this be so, then the eighth spiracles in the 
mosquito larva have been drawn up behind the ninth segment in whole or in part for, as has 
been seen, the pits from which their tracheae have been drawn lie behind the shrunken 
ninth tergite. In this connection it is of interest to compare the culicine siphon with the 
respiratory structures in the larva of Anopheks. It has already been noted that the stig- 
matic plate of the culicine siphon shows in miniature the parts surrounding the terminal 
spiracles of the Anopheles larva. Lying external to these parts in the Anopheles larva is, 
anteriorly on the eighth segment, a fold which in a previous communication (1922) I 
named the presiphonic fold, a fold which is continuous laterally with the areas delimited 
by the bar at the base of the comb. It is in these lateral areas that in Anopheles the pupal 
paddles develop, their tips being in the sides of the scoop, which correspond to the posterior 
lobes of the culicine stigmatic plate. It requires but little modification to see in these parts 
areas which have become the sides of the siphon in the culicine larva. The eighth spiracles 
would then appear to have migrated backwards between the ninth tergite and sternite with 
the result that the ninth sternite has been left in position at the base of the anal segment 
ventrally, where later in the adult stage it is seen as the narrow ninth sternite bearing in the 
male the gonocoxites, whilst the ninth tergite is shifted bodily dorsally to form in the 
culicine larva a part of the spiracular plate, or in the anopheline larva the presiphonic fold, 
its lateral parts becoming the pupal paddles and its central part the ninth tergite in the 
imago. 
REFERENCES 
BAISAS, F. E. and PAGAYON, A. V. (1949). Notes on the Philippine mosquitoes. XV. The chaeto- 
taxy of the pupa and larva of Tripteroides. Philipp. J. Sci. 78, 43-72. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). The Fauna of British India. Diptera. Vol. v. Taylor and Francis, London. 
BELKIN, J. N. (1951). A revised nomenclature for the chaetotaxy of the mosquito larva. Amer. 
Midl. Nat. 44, 678-98. 
224 
REFERENCES 
BELKIN, J. N. (1952). The homology of the chaetotaxy of immature mosquitoes and a revised 
nomenclature for the chaetotaxy of the pupa. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 54, 115-30. 
BELKIN, J. N. (1953). Corrected interpretations of some elements of the abdominal chaetotaxy 
of the mosquito larva and pupa (Diptera: Culicidae). Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 55, 318-24. 
BLANCHARD, R. (1905). Les moustiques: histoire naturelle et me’dicale. Rudival, Paris. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). The subgenus Stegomyia in Netherlands-India. 
Geneesk. Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind. Byblad 2, 1-119. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1922). The development and structure of the terminal abdominal segments 
and hypopygium of the mosquito with observations on the homologies of the terminal 
segments of the larva. Znd. J. Med. Res. 10, 530-72. 
COOLING, L. E. (1924). The larval stages and biology of the commoner species of Australian 
mosquitoes, etc. Aust. Dept. Hlth Serv. Publ. (Trop. Div.), no. 8. 
CRAWFORD, R. (1933). The structure of the head of some anopheline larvae. Malayan Med. J. 8, 
25-38. 
DEMOLL, R. (1917). Die Sinnesorgane der Arthropoden ihr Bau und ihre Funktion. Braunschweig. 
DOANE, R. A. (1910). Insects and Disease. Constable and Co., London. 
DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1906). The larvae of Culicidae classified as independent organisms. 
J. N. Y. Ent. Sot. 14, 169-230. 
EDWARDS, F. W. and GIVEN, D. H. C. (1928). The early stages of some Singapore mosquitoes. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 337-57. 
EYSELL, A. (1913). Die Stechmiicken. In Mense’s Handb. TropenKr. Ed. 2, 1, 97-l 83. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). 0s mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Para. 
HALLER, G. (1878). Kleinere Bruchstiicke zur vergleichenden Anatomie der Arthropoden. 
I. Ueber das Atmungsorgan der Stechmiickenlarve. Arch. Naturgesch. Jahrb. 44, 1, 
91-5. 
HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1936). Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region. Vol. I, Larval Bionomics and 
Taxonomy of Culicine Larvae. Ed. 2. London, 1951, with notes by Mattingly. Brit. Mus. 
(Nat. Hist.). 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1901). Mosquitoes: How they Live, How they Carry Disease, How they are 
Classified, How they may be Destroyed. McClure Phillips and Co., New York. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (19 12). See references in ch. I (f). 
IMMS, A. D. (1907). On the larval and pupal stages of Anopheles maculipennis Meigen. J. Hyg., 
Camb. 7, 291-316. 
JAMES, S. P. (1899). Collection of mosquitoes and their larvae. Indian Med. Gaz. 34, 431-4. 
KEILIN, D., TATE, P. and VINCENT, M. (1935). The perispiracular glands of mosquito larvae. 
Parasitology, 27, 257-62. 
KNIGHT, K. L. and CHAMBERLAIN, R. W. (1948). A new nomenclature for the chaetotaxy of the 
mosquito pupa, based on a comparative study of the genera. Proc. Helm. Sot. Wash. 15, l-10. 
KUMM, H. W. (1931). Studies on Ad;des larvae in South Western Nigeria and the vicinity of Kano. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 22, 65-74. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). Morphological changes observed during the development of the larva 
of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 297-307. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.). London. 
MARTINI, E. (1923). Ueber einige fiir das System bedeutungsvolle Merkmale der Stechmiicken. 
2001. Jb. 46, 517-90. 
MARTINI, E. (1929). Culicidae. In Lindner’s Die Fliegen der Palaearktischen Region. Parts 11, 
12, 74-85. 
MONTCHADSKY, A. (1924). Neue Ergebnisse iiber Anatomie und Funktion des Atmungsapparats 
der Culicidenlarven. Trav. Sot. Nat. Petrogr. 54, no. 1. 
MONTCHADSKY, A. (1926). Larva of Aedes (Ochlerotatus) pulchritarsis Rond. var. Stegomyina 
Stack. and Monthc. nov. from Turkestan. Bull. Ent. Res. 17, 151-7. 
MONTCHADSKY, A. (1927). Morphologische Analysis eines bisher nicht beachteten systematischen 
Merkmals der Culicidenlarven. Bull. Acad. Sci. U.R.S.S. nos. 5-6. 
MONTCHADSKY, A. (1930). Die Stigmalplatten der Culiciden Larven. 2001. Jb. 58, 541-636. 
I.5 225 CH 
THE LARVA 
PURI, I. M. (1931). Larvae of anopheline mosquitoes with full descriptions of those of the 
Indian species. Indian Med. Res. Mem. no. 21. 
RASCHKE, E. W. (1887). Die Larve von Culex nemorosus. Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Insekten 
Anatomie und Histologie. Arch. Naturgesch. 1, 133-63. 
SALEM, H. H. (1931). Some observations on the structure of the mouth parts and fore intestine 
of the fourth stage larva of AFdes (Stegomyia) fasciata (Fab.). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 25, 
393-419. 
SAMTLEBEN, B. (1929). Anatomie und Histologie der Abdominal- und Thoraxmusculatur von 
Stechmiickenlarven. 2. wiss. Zool. 134, 179-269. 
SAUTET, J. and AUDIBERT, Y. (1946). Etudes biologiques et morphologiques sur certaines larves 
de moustiques, etc. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 39, 43-61. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). The Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York and London. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901). See references in ch. I (e). 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 
32, 145-202. 
WALKIERS, J. (1935). Contribution a l’etude des larves des Stegomyias de Maladi et Thysville. 
Ann. Sot. BeZge M&d. Trop. 15, 469-73. 
WESCHE, W. (1910). On the larval and pupal stages of West African Culicidae. Bull. Ent. Res. 1, 
7-50. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933). The function of the anal gills of the mosquito larva. J. Exp. BioZ. 
10, 16-26. 
226 
X 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
(a) GENERAL REMARKS ON THE INSTARS 
No account of the larva would be complete that did not take into consideration the different 
instars and changes which the larva passes through in the course of its growth. The most 
complete account of these changes in A&?es aegypti, including measurements of the parts 
instar by instar, is that by Macfie (1917). * 
In A. aegypti, as in all mosquitoes, there are four larval instars, each instar terminating 
in a moult or ecdysis. The instars are periods of growth in which the larva starts at about 
the level it reached at the end of the previous instar and ends with that with which it starts 
in the next instar. At such time the soft parts increase in size whilst the hard cuticular 
structures such as the head, spines and hairs remain unchanged. The result is that whilst 
the hard parts in the different instars show throughout characters special to that instar the 
changes in the soft parts and relation of these to the hard give rise to a similarity in appear- 
ance of corresponding stages of growth of all instars. Thus each instar starts with a rela- 
tively large head, a short respiratory siphon and relatively very long lateral hairs, and ends 
with a small head, longer siphon and much less conspicuous lateral hairs, the general effect, 
except in size, depending more on the stage of growth than on the particular instar con- 
cerned (Fig. 17 (l), (2), (3); Fig. 18 (l), (2)). 
IDENTIFICATION OF THE INSTARS 
Except for the first instar, which has a number of special features, most changes in chaeto- 
taxy and other external characters consist of an increased branching of the hairs, increase 
in the number and branching of spines and increase in complexity of parts such as the 
respiratory siphon, anal segment and mouth-parts. There are certain characters, however, 
which are specific to certain instars. TheJirst instar at all stages is at once identified by the 
presence on the dorsum of the head of the egg-breaker. Further characters in which this 
instar differs will be given later. But the presence of the egg-breaker is so immediately 
diagnostic that no other characters are necessary for identification. The second and third 
instars are, with a little experience, to be identified by their size and general appearance. 
The most certain method of identification is by measurement of the transverse diameter of 
the head. In the successive instars I-IV this should be approximately 0.3, 0.45, 0.65 and 
0.95 mm. In this respect the third instar in the later stages is apt to be somewhat variable. 
The dark head at this stage should, however, suffice to distinguish any well-grown third 
instar larva from the fourth instar larva in which the head, unlike all other instars, never 
fully darkens. The fourth instar also in all stages shows the rudiments of the pupal respira- 
tory trumpets. 
* For other descriptions of the instar characters see Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912), Tanzer (1921, Anopheles 
Theobaldi, Cukx and Corethra), Cooling (1924, Azdes aegypti), Put-i (193 1, Anopheles), Tate (1932, Orthopodomyia), 
Marshall (1938) who gives a good summary of the changes, Jobling (1938) especially changes in the respiratory 
siphon in Culex, Wigglesworth (1938) for description of the early first instar in Acdes aegypti. 
227 15-2 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
In cultures the cast skins appearing at the surface of the water also show the stage at 
which the majority of the larvae have arrived. At a little over 24 hours from hatching there 
appear in numbers the minute skins of the first instar, the dark heads visible to the naked 
eye only as tiny black specks. On the second day the skins of the second instar are readily 
seen as skins floating at the surface, as also on the third day are the large third instar skins. 
The skins at the fourth ecdysis are obviously those of the full-grown larva. They appear 
only some 3 days after the smaller third instar skins and when pupae are present. 
RECOGNITION OF STAGES OF THE INSTARS 
Special interest relates to the stage in each instar immediately following ecdysis and that 
immediately preceding change to the next instar. One reason is that these two stages 
constitute definite points in growth, which at other times during the instar proceeds without 
any structural landmarks. These are, therefore, the stages most suitable for measurements 
or other determinations relative to the instars. The two stages will be referred to respec- 
tively as the immediate and the pre-ecdysis stage, or, used in same sense, post-ecdysis 
may be substituted for immediate. 
These stages have certain characteristics. Thus immediately following ecdysis, especially 
in the early instars, a most striking feature is the large ballooned, unpigmented and almost 
transparent head (Fig. 17 (1 A), (2~), (3~)). This later hardens and darkens, becoming in 
the first three instars almost black. It is thus easy by naked eye to pick out from other 
more normal larvae any which have recently undergone ecdysis. Where material is required 
for measurements such as are given later when dealing with growth, a useful technique is to 
collect in the first place such larvae in the instar preceding that required as show themselves 
on the point of ecdysis. This is done as explained below, and these larvae can then be kept 
under observation and removed immediately they leave their skins. It is advisable to 
wait a few minutes for the head structures to adjust themselves. Newly ecdysed forms are 
also very useful for making preparations to show larval structure since at this stage fat-body 
is at a minimum and the head, and even to a considerable extent the body, is so transparent 
that the internal organs and details of structure show to best advantage. 
The most conspicuous feature of the pre-ecdysis stage is the appearance under the cuticle 
with approaching ecdysis of the dark hairs of the next instar wrapped round the body and 
clearly visible as dark bands across the thorax and abdominal segments (Fig. 17 (2~), 
Fig. 18 (1 B)). Larvae in this state can usually be picked out by naked eye owing to their 
Figure 17. General characters of instars. 
First instar larva. A, newly hatched larva immediately after leaving the egg. A', the same when 
the head has swollen to the normal condition for the instar. B, first instar larva ‘pre-ecdysis’. 
Second instar larva. A, ‘ immediate ’ ; B, ‘ pre-ecdysis ‘. 
Third instar larva ‘ immediate ‘. 
First instar larva. a, c, lateral view of terminal segments at beginning and end of instar; 
b, d, posterior view of siphon at these times. 
Second instar larva. Lettering as 4. 
Third instar larva. Lettering as 4. 
Figures l-3 (also 1 and 2 of Fig. 18) are at the same magnification, and so approximately are 
Figs. 4-6. 
228 
I 1.0 mm. I 
I 
a b d 
4 
b d 
6 
b 
Figure 17 
229 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
I 1-O mm. I -: A’ . . .::. 
‘.’ 
. 
. 
: . 
I_; 
1. 
. . 
. 
. . 
. 
2 
Figure 18. General characters of instars (cont.). 
1 Third instar larva ‘ pre-ecdysis ‘. 
2 Fourth instar larva ‘immediate’. 
The figures are at the same magnification as those of Fig. 17 (l)-(3). 
slightly darker coloration produced by these bands. In the fourth instar, however, where 
there are no such hairs, since the oncoming pupal hairs are not conspicuous, the approach 
of ecdysis is readily judged by the degree of darkening of the pupal trumpet rudiments. 
These lie in the shoulders of the thorax and are very conspicuous in the later stages of this 
instar. At first pale they become as the larva matures first yellow and eventually brown, 
by which time the larva is on the point of pupation. 
230 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
(b) LARVAL ECDYSIS 
Of the physiological changes occurring at and responsible for ecdysis it will be sufficient 
for the present to note that the process begins with separation of the epidermal cells from 
the old and the laying down of a new cuticle, the space between the new and the old 
becoming filled with fluid, ecdysialjkid. Further the ecdysial fluid, by reason of its enzyme 
or enzymes, digests and dissolves the thick endocuticular inner layer of the old cuticle 
leaving only the thin outer layers. Hence the cast skin, as weighed for instance in the case 
of the mosquito larva, would not necessarily be that of the whole cuticle as originally laid 
down. Further, the cuticle of the larva over most of the body lacks any hardened layer 
(exocuticle) except for such parts as the head capsule, respiratory siphon and hair plaques. 
Of these hard parts it is only the head capsule that offers any bar to removal at ecdysis of 
the contained larval parts, though some tearing of the thin cuticle near the head may take 
place. In the case of the head capsule, dissolving of the endocuticle leaves certain lines of 
weakness where the exocuticle is deficient, ecdysial lines. Such are the lines that have the 
appearance, or actually are, the arms of the epicranial sutures and at ecdysis it is these that 
break to allow the new larval head to emerge. At ecdysis the head capsule is torn along 
these lines as far back as their termination at the neck and nearly as far forwards as the 
antenna1 prominences, thus allowing a broad wedge-shaped portion of the dorsum of the 
head to be pushed forwards as a flap and the cervical collar to part at this point. Apart 
from the head capsule and the delicate stigmatic cords there is little to prevent the body of 
the larva bathed in ecdysial fluid from being drawn out. Besides the external surface of 
the body similar processes take place in the cuticular lining of the tracheal trunks and 
vessels enabling these similarly to break at lines of weakness and so be drawn out as 
described below. 
As ecdysis approaches, especially the final or pupal ecdysis, the larva tends to cease 
feeding and to remain at rest at the surface. In the early instars ecdysis is usually very rapid 
and the process is most readily followed in moulting of the third or fourth instar larva, 
though in the latter case it is somewhat modified by the fact that it is the pupa and not 
another larval instar to which it gives rise. One of the first signs that ecdysis is about to 
take place is the appearance of dark bands across the thorax due to the circularly wrapped 
lateral hairs of the next instar shining through the cuticle (Fig. 17 (2~) ; Fig. 18 (1 B)). 
Under the microscope these bands are very conspicuous and are useful as enabling one to 
pick out at once larvae that are about to moult. The tracheal trunks are also now seen to 
have double contours, the original and still only functional trunk lying within the larger 
future trunk that is filled with fluid. It may now perhaps be observed that the ecdysial 
lines on the head capsule are parted, especially in the third instar where some widening of 
these lines may be present for some little time before active splitting occurs. With the active 
onset of moulting the pale transparent new instar head, covered with droplet-like marks 
on the cuticle is seen exposed as it forces forwards the flap-like dorsum of the head. Active 
pulsation movements are now seen in the interior of the head. These are due to contrac- 
tions of the pharynx making swallowing movements as described by Wigglesworth (1938). 
Vermicular movements and twitchings also take place in the abdomen and there may be 
occasional lashing movements of this part. Twitchings are seen also in the occipital region 
where muscles of the mandibles and maxillae are assisting in the withdrawal of the new 
mouth-parts from the old. The tracheal trunks may now be seen to be broken at points 
231 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
distal to the cords passing from them to the puncta. Shruggings and flexures of the head 
accompanied by powerful muscular contractions eventually free the head, tearing the soft 
membrane of the neck and thorax and finally thrusting the old head capsule, now com- 
pletely discarded, downwards. Almost imperceptibly now the thin cuticle of the body is 
slipped backwards dragging with it the broken-up pieces of the tracheal trunks that have 
been drawn out through traction on the cords. Probably also, to judge by appearances, 
the fragments of cord are partly squeezed out through the now open soft spiracular openings 
by movements of the body. As the thin wrinkling cuticle slips back, the long thoracic hairs 
are liberated and straighten. After the skin has come to lie in a wrinkled mass about the 
posterior extremity of the larva, the siphon and anal papillae are withdrawn and the larva 
wriggles free. Though the description is long the whole process, especially in the early 
instars, happens with surprising rapidity. With a healthy larva the time taken may be less 
than a minute. Where conditions are adverse it may take half an hour or more. The chief 
delay is the time taken to liberate the head. Once this is free full emergence usually quickly 
follows. 
The discarded skin, at first closely compacted, after a time loosens and floats like a 
shadow larva with its siphon still attached to the surface film. In a good culture it may be 
seen so floating with hundreds of others after each ecdysis period. 
The new larva now has an almost transparent head which slowly darkens, becoming in 
the first three instars almost black. In the fourth instar larva it never darkens so fully. 
The tracheal trunks, especially in the second and third instars are, after ecdysis, relatively 
enormous and the larva is extremely buoyant so that it floats even in spirit and may often 
be seen floating at the surface when first put into fixative when larvae of other stages sink. 
Extraction of the tracheal trunks is according to a general plan as follows. With the 
siphon come away the tracheal trunks up to the level of the break in the trunks towards the 
anterior end of the seventh segment, bringing with them the branches supplying the 
anal segment. In the other abdominal segments the break in the trunk occurs behind the 
point of attachment of the cord, so that it is the portion of trunk from the preceding 
segment to that carrying the puncta that is drawn out. In the thorax the same plan holds 
good. The greater part of the trunks on each side are drawn out with the cords attached 
to the puncta of the first abdominal segment. A portion in front of this is drawn out by 
the cord from the metathoracic puncta and the lining of the trunks in the prothorax with 
that of the head tracheae by the cord from the puncta lying between the mesothoracic and 
metathoracic hair series, which has here been considered to be the mesothoracic puncta 
(Fig. 29, p. 301; Fig. 48 (l), p. 391). 
The skins left after ecdysis, especially that of the fourth instar larva, have been much 
used for systematic and descriptive purposes since all the cutaneous structures are ex- 
ceedingly well displayed and all possibility of error is avoided where the corresponding 
imago has been bred out and preserved. The skins also show with remarkable clearness the 
structures connected with the mouth-parts and pharynx. Such skins, when they have 
suitably relaxed, can be mounted flat after suitable treatment in canada balsam or Bhatia’s 
medium, or for accurate systematic work or study of the chaetotaxy should be prepared by 
Puri’s method. In this the skin is niggled under the dissecting microscope with needles to 
divide it along the ventral mid-line, floated on a slide and spread out with needles. It is 
then flooded with 90 per cent alcohol which causes the skin to flatten and adhere to the 
glass. Or if desired it can be detached and treated as a section. 
232 
LARVAL ECDYSIS 
Besides making use of the cast skin, the newly ecdysed larva is very suitable for morpho- 
logical studies owing to its transparency. The head especially is so transparent that, 
examined fresh or mounted, the brain and other structures are very well displayed, especi- 
ally if suitably stained, for example, by picro-carmine. Chordotonal organs and some 
other structures are also at this stage well seen, and owing to the fat-body being at a 
minimum at this stage in the fourth instar larva the newly ecdysed fourth instar larva forms 
excellent material for sectioning. 
Still another useful purpose served by the newly ecdysed larva is that it forms a fixed 
point from which observations can be timed when studying growth, etc. 
(c) THE FIRST INSTAR LARVA 
The first instar larva when newly hatched measures about a millimetre in length, but grows 
during the instar to nearly twice that measurement. When first hatched it has a very 
characteristic appearance (Fig. 17 (1) A, A’). Good figures in this stage have been given by 
Roubaud (1929), and by Wigglesworth (1938). At this time the head is narrow and rather 
triangular in shape. The brushes lie impacted in the pre-oral cavity between the mandibles 
and it is only after some two hours, when the head has swollen, that they are liberated and 
begin to work intermittently. The swelling begins shortly after hatching and is well marked 
in about 2 hours when the head is much enlarged, globular and swollen out with fluid. 
This swelling is largely in the frontal region of the head, which remains bulged even when 
the head darkens and hardens, giving to this in the first, and to some extent in other early 
instars, an overhung shape differing from that of the fourth instar (Fig. 19 (1)). Other 
characteristic features of the early first instar are the elbowed antennae and the markedly 
annulated abdomen. Later the antennae straighten as the larva grows and the deeply 
indented abdomen becomes more uniformly cylindrical and worm-like. Other charac- 
teristics are given below. 
THE EGG-BREAKER (Fig. 7 (4), (5); Fig. 19 (l), (2) 
This is present only in the first instar larva and has already been described to some extent 
in the chapter dealing with eclosion. It is situated on the dorsum of the head on the most 
prominent part of the fronto-clypeus and consists of a strongly sclerotised, very sharp 
pointed, curved and somewhat flattened cone set in an oval area of soft membrane (Fig. 7 (4)). 
Passing backwards from the conical main body is a line of thickening joining this to the 
normal cuticle of the head and giving to the whole structure somewhat the appearance of 
a tennis racquet. Where this extension joins the head capsule is an area of thickening and 
into this on each side of the middle line is inserted the origin of the large median retractor 
muscles of the feeding brushes (head muscles no. 2). * Two smaller muscles, nos. 4 and 13, 
passing respectively to the roof of the mouth and the roof of the pharynx, also take origin, 
if not from the cone itself, at least from the hypoderm near this (Fig. 19 (1)). The egg- 
breaker in British mosquitoes has been described by Marshall (1938), who points out that 
in species of Ak;des the cone ends in a point, whereas in Culex it is chisel-shaped. In AZdes 
aegypti, even under high magnification, the point is still round and very sharp. 
* For numbering and description of muscles see ch. XIII (c), p. 306. 
233 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
THE HEAD AND MOUTH-PARTS (Fig.19(1-5)) 
In the young larva the only sclerotised parts are the egg-breaker and the tiny mental 
sclerite. Later the head capsule darkens and becomes to the naked eye almost black. 
A curious feature of the cuticle of the dorsum of the head and especially in the region of 
the egg-breaker is its finely ribbed character giving an appearance very like the skin lines 
on the finger tips used in classifying finger prints. It also differs somewhat from that of 
later stages in being very widely open behind. Through this in the later stages of the instar 
a good portion of the brain is extruded into the swollen neck. 
The labral parts are, in miniature, almost identical with those of the larva in later instars. 
The palatum, tessellated membrane, brush plates and their characteristic apodemes are all 
to be recognised (Fig. 19 (4), (5)). The feeding brushes have much the same characters as 
those of the mature larva and already show towards their inner ends the curved thickened 
brush filaments with fine comb-like ends as described in the mature larva. The preclypeus, 
though more overhung, is very similar to this structure in later instars and not only shows 
the preclypeal hairs but also the small outer hairs (hair 1 a), or at least their basal marks. 
The antennae, when they have straightened and hardened, differ little from these organs 
in the mature larva except that the antenna1 hair is relatively rather large and double. The 
parts at the apex are fully as complex showing a number of hairs and processes, namely, 
a dorsal hair, an outer small and a larger inner spine, a sensory papilla and two ventral 
hairs arising a little below the apex. Of these the inner hair is especially long, reaching 
about one-third of the length of the shaft of the antenna. 
All the head hairs can be located if carefully looked for, though all are unbranched and 
the arrangement of the important hairs 4-7 different and seemingly more primitive 
(Fig. 19 (2), (3), (4)). Thus the three frontal hairs are now more or less in line, very like the 
three frontal hairs in the Anopheles larva, and the hair 4 is well in front. The position of 
Figure 19. First instar larva. 
Lateral view of head of first instar larva. a, overhanging frontal region; b, pale area showing 
position of pharynx. 
Dorsal view of same to show chaetotaxy. 
Frontal portion of same more highly magnified. 
Ventral view of head of newly hatched larva. 
Showing palatum and related structures. 
Lateral view of thorax to show chaetotaxy. The prothoracic hairs are to the right. 
Abdominal segments I-VIII to show chaetotaxy. Dorsal view. The asterisks mark a hair of 
the small dorsal group (hair 5?) that increases in length to segment V. a, hair 1; b, hair 2. 
Lateral view of terminal segments of newly hatched larva. Only two of the four anal papillae 
are shown. 
Lateral view of siphon of advanced first instar larva showing ballooned newly formed tracheal 
trunk of oncoming second instar surrounding pipe-like tracheal trunk of first instar. 
Lettering : A, anal segment; ap, flabellar apodeme; ash, apical hair of siphon; bmh, basal 
maxillary hair; dh, dorsal hairs. One side only shown; fb, flabellum or feeding brush; fb’, flabellar 
plate ; h, hypoderm of new forming brushes ; md, mandible; mx, maxilla; p, palatum; ph, pilot 
hair; sh, siphon hair; sh. f, hair f of Martini; tm, tessellated membrane ; tt, tracheal trunk. 
Muscles are numbered as given in the list of head muscles in text (ch. XIII (c)). 
Hairs are numbered as for the fourth instar larva (see Figs. 14, 15). 
234 
13 4 
b 
~O’lmm., h I 
~OfbSmm.~ 5 10-l mm. 1 6 
(- sh.f 
Figure 19 
235 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
hair 8 also differs somewhat, being much nearer the middle line about half-way between the 
ocelli and the egg-breaker. Hair 9 is shown only as a pale spot near the posterior portion 
of the suture, which in the head of the first instar larva is very short. A point of some 
interest is that hair 17 of Martini (basal maxillary hair; Fig. 19 (4) bmh) does not arise 
from a separate basal sclerite of the maxilla, which has not yet been separated off, but from 
the head capsule on what will clearly later be this sclerite (Fig. 19 (4)). Thus the supposed 
error of some authors of depicting this hair on the head capsule is correct for the first 
instar larva. 
The mandibles and maxillae are much as in the fourth instar, though somewhat simpler. 
The mandibles show the characteristic combs, teeth and a small molar process. The 
maxillae are rather conical with the terminal tuft less spread out than in the later instars. 
The maxilla has a terminal blunt spine about half the length of the organ. The palp is 
flattened dorso-ventrally with a crest bearing some smaller spines. On its side is a minute 
projection, but so far as could be made out no distinct hair. 
THORACIC AND ABDOMINAL CHAETOTAXY (Fig. 19(6),(7); Fig. 20(5)) 
The long lateral hairs and all other hairs of the thorax and abdomen are simple and un- 
branched. Most, if not all, of the larger hairs of the fourth instar are represented. There 
are no strongly sclerotised basal plaques as seen in the later instars, though some indi- 
cation where these will appear is sometimes given. The most notable missing hairs are the 
prothoracic hairs l-3. Four hairs of the pleural series (hairs 9-12) are present on the pro- 
thorax and three on both the meso- and metathorax. The minute hair 12 on the meso- 
thorax is not present until the fourth instar (or third according to Macfie). The same 
applies to hair 12 on the metathorax. 
On abdominal segments I-IV the large lateral hairs (6 and 7) arise close together from 
separate bases and are simple. Next to these the most conspicuous hair is the pilot hair 
(hair 8) which arises a little in front of hairs 6 and 7. It is present on all segments except 
the first and eighth. As indicated on the figure, there are four small hairs only on the dorsal 
surface of the segments much in the relative positions of the small dorsal hairs in the fourth 
instar. The outermost of these hairs increases in length to segment V and would appear to 
be hair 5. In this case hair 4 is the probable missing hair (see also Mattingly (19 17), who 
gives only four hairs for instars I and II (five for instar III)). Three hairs only are present 
on the ventral surface of segments II-V instead of five (hairs 9-13). This accords with 
Belkin’s finding that hairs 9 and 13 only appear later. On segments VI and VII all hairs 
are relatively small. At least eight are present on each side of VI and ten on VII. The five 
pentad hairs are all simple. 
THE SIPHON (Fig. 19 (8), (9)) 
In the newly hatched larva the siphon is almost entirely soft. Later the terminal portion 
only becomes darker and hardened, that is about one-fifth of its length, the sclerotised 
portion stopping, as in later instars except the fourth, at about the level of the distal end 
of the pecten. The pecten spines number 4-5 arising on soft membrane. The siphon hair is 
simple. As the parts harden towards the end of the instar it becomes possible to trace most 
of the structures of the spiracular plate. The tracheal trunks, which as described later are 
narrow and tubular, open by small orifices close together towards the anterior border of 
236 
THE FIRST INSTAR 
the siphon apex. Behind these are the two posterior lobes with their inner and outer 
plates. The inner plates are clearly visible from an early stage, the outer only later. From 
the outer surface of the lobe on each side, and from the outer plate when this becomes 
apparent through hardening of the cuticle, arises a largish curved hair (hair f of Martini 
(Fig. 19 (9) shrf). This is figured by Wigglesworth and apparently takes a part in the early 
contacting of the surface of the water when the siphon is first brought against this. Usually 
in the advanced larva indications of the anterior lobe with its chitinised outer plate can be 
seen. The lateral lobes are not clearly shown at this stage, but their position is indicated by 
a small hair. 
The most striking differences from the siphon in later instars relate to the tracheal 
trunks. As also throughout the abdomen these are narrow and tubular and even under the 
oil immersion show no indication of taenidia. They are soon surrounded by the developing, 
dilated and fluid-filled trunks of the succeeding instar within which they lie loose and 
usually thrown into bends as though allowing for expansion of the body with growth 
(Fig. (19 (8) tt, (9)). At their terminations they are rounded and appear to open only by 
a small pore or slit. They show no indication at any stage of the formation of the felt 
chambers. 
THE ANAL LOBE (Fig. 17 (4) c; Fig. 19 (8)) 
The anal lobe carries dorsally at its apical extremity four well-developed dorsal hairs. These 
rise from a well-developed basal plate and are unbranched. The saddle plate is restricted 
to the extreme dorsal aspect of the lobe in its distal half. The saddle hair is simple and arises 
laterally. There is no ventral fan or any indication of this. The anal papillae are banana 
shaped and about the same length as the segment. They show in the early stages of the 
instar an outer layer of large flat, but thick, cells with little or no indication of any cuticle. 
The branching tracheae so conspicuous in later stages are undeveloped. 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE (Fig. 20 (l),(2),(3)) 
The alimentary canal consists of the same parts and has much the appearance of that in 
the mature larva, the chief difference being in the disproportionate size of the proventriculus 
and salivary glands and the smaller gastric caeca. The pharynx is of the characteristic and 
dilated form seen in the mature larva with much of its structure including lines of fringe 
already marked out. The fringes, though rather delicate, are very similar to those in the 
fourth instar, the filaments and spaces being in proportion, in this case measuring together 
only about 1.0 ,u. As shown in the figure, the lateral oral apodemes are present and show 
their characteristic fish-hook appearance. The proventriculus shows the same general 
structure as in the later stages, but is relatively very large, occupying much of the thorax. 
The intussuscepted portion of the oesophagus is long and narrow with a narrow lumen and 
there is reason to believe that it plays an active part as a sphincter in the early stages of the 
instar. The gastric caeca are small and at first almost globular. Later they become more 
oval, but remain small. The salivary glands extend almost to the thoracic wall and in size 
almost equal the gastric caeca. They show the bulla-like vesicle at their ends as in the 
mature larva. The mid-gut and intestine, as also the Malpighian tubules, do not differ greatly 
from these organs in the mature larva. 
The tracheal system shows the same general plan as in the mature larva, except that the 
tracheal trunks are narrow and tubular and seem devoid of taenidia and that many future 
237 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
tracheal branches are as yet indicated only by strings of formative cells. The same system of 
commissures linking the trunks is present and rather more conspicuous than in the later 
instars. The sharp angular bend of the trunks in the thorax and the ending of these in the 
dorsal and ventral branches to the head are all as in the mature larva. What is characteristic 
is that owing to the narrowness of the tracheal vessels proper to the instar and the dispro- 
portionate size of those of the second instar the tracheal trunks and larger tracheae are 
everywhere in the later stages of the instar surrounded by the hugely dilated fluid-filled 
developing tracheae that will eventually replace them. At no other stage is this appearance 
so marked. 
The muscles appear very similar in arrangement, though on a minute scale, to those of 
the fourth instar larva, but have not been investigated in detail. The same oblique arrange- 
ment of the chief muscular bundles is present in the abdominal segments as in the mature 
larva and the number of strands is not greatly less. 
The brain differs notably from this organ in the fourth instar by the absence of the large 
optic lobes and the relative prominence of the deutocerebrum (Fig. 20 (3)). The proto- 
cerebrum is globular and increases greatly in size during the instar, becoming towards the 
end of this period partly pushed into the neck. A very conspicuous feature of the first 
instar larva is the chain of ventral ganglia which extends across the middle third of the 
segments as oval plaques of nerve ganglionic tissue lying close up against the cuticle 
(Fig. 20 (3)). A s in the mature larva, no indication is given of any ganglion posterior to 
that of the eighth abdominal segment. 
The fat-body is restricted chiefly to small masses occupying the prominent angles of the 
abdominal segments. In each lobule there is a small characteristic cluster of large oeno- 
cytes, these being of a size appropriate to the larva, namely about 10 ,U in diameter as 
against 40 ,u or more in the fourth instar. 
(d) THE LATER INSTARS 
The second instar larva after ecdysis is much the same length as the fully grown first instar 
larva, but is bulkier and the swollen head is enormous, an effect added to by its almost 
glass-like transparency when first liberated. The tracheal trunks are now enlarged and 
Figure 20. Instar characters. 
Dorsal view of thorax of first instar larva. 
Lateral view of portion of head of same showing pharyngeal fringes. 
Early first instar larva stained with picrocarmine showing brain and ventral nerve cord. 
Schematic representation of pleural hair base to show positions of hair origins. The base is 
shownasthoughviewedfrominfront. a, b, c,d, hairs9,10,11,12respectively;e,positionof spine. 
Pleural hairs of instars I-III. A, prothoracic; B, mesothoracic; C, metathoracic. 
Comb scales (A) and pecten teeth (B). a, first instar; b, second instar; c, third instar. 
Mental sclerite of first instar larva. 
Mental sclerites to same scale of instars I-IV. 
Lettering : C’s, gastric caeca ; DC, deutocerebrum ; f”, pharyngeal fringes ; H, hypostomal area ; 
L’, labial area; Zpp, lateral plates of pharynx; md, mandible; mx, maxilla; Oe, oesophagus; 
P, pharynx; PC, protocerebrum ; Pv, proventriculus ; sg, salivary gland ; ss, suspensorium ; 
XS’, lateral oral apodeme. 
For hair numbers see text, p. 214. 
238 
, lPP 
I 001 mm. I 2 
.:‘.qg ;o 
:.’ w 11 .9v , ‘,& 10 
12 - 
9 10 11 
: 11 
G. ,;. : 
p -! j+:y 8 
li 
9 
10 
11 . 
P 9 . . 
\jJ 10 
“’ . . . ‘a 11 
1; .;_...b 
B A 
5 
1 Ot302mm.~ 7 
Figure 20 
239 I O+Ol mm. I 8 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
lined with taenidia and the terminal portions in the siphon are ballooned. The larva of this 
stage when newly ecdysed is for some reason conspicuously light and when along with 
other larvae it is placed in 70 per cent alcohol it floats at the surface whilst other stages 
sink. Unlike the first instar larva and in common with the later instars it cannot, as noted 
by Wigglesworth (1938), take air into the tracheae if it is prevented from reaching the 
surface even for a short time from ecdysis. As in the previous instar the head darkens and 
the body becomes long and cylindrical, whilst with increase in size as ecdysis approaches 
the head, at first disproportionately large, again becomes disproportionately small. It 
almost repeats in fact the change in appearance of the first instar but on a larger scale. 
During the instar the larva grows in length from about 2 to about 3 mm. 
The third instar larva, whilst it has certain characters of its own, is to a large extent a 
repetition on a still larger scale of the second instar larva. For some reason it is much more 
variable in head measurement than any other stage, there being large and small headed 
forms. It is very apt to have the ecdysial lines on the head capsule open for some time 
before ecdysis is definitely in progress. The pre-ecdysis stage is rather long and thin and 
being larger than the previous instars it shows this character more conspicuously. The 
fourth instar at a corresponding size has become much stouter due to development of the 
thoracic imaginal buds and accumulation of fat-body. 
Little further need to be said regarding details of structure in these instars since in most 
respects they either conform to the description already given for the fourth instar or show 
only small departure from this. Such departure largely relates to external characters. For 
a very full description of these changes see Macfie (19 17), and for measurements of the body 
parts this author’s account as also the chapter in the present work on growth. The fol- 
lowing is a brief account of changes undergone. 
CHAETOTAXY 
By the second instar the small head hair 4 has become dendritic as in the fourth instar 
and the arrangement of the frontal hairs has by this or the next instar also become as in the 
fourth instar. The antenna1 hair has become single and remains so. The prothoracic hairs 
1-3, apparently lacking in the first instar, have in the second become quite conspicuous. 
The hairs 9-12 (pleural hairs) on the meso- and metathorax have by the second instar 
developed sclerotised basal papillae and these by the third instar have developed spines 
approaching in character those that are so conspicuous a feature in the fourth instar larva 
(Fig. 20 (5)). The exact relation to the pleural hairs to their basal papillae is in need of 
some brief explanation. On the prothorax there are three large and one small hair 
arranged as shown in Fig. 20 (5) A. These alter very little, even in size, in the successive 
instars and the basal papilla remains to the end little more than a soft tubercle. On the 
meso- and metathorax there are on each from the first instar onwards three large hairs and 
these remain recognisable throughout all the larval instars in spite of changed appearance 
due to branching. The basal papillae take the form of strongly sclerotised scoop-shaped 
structures with a smooth convex surface directed posteriorly. From the mesothoracic and 
metathoracic papilla there arise in each case, as will be seen from the figure, three large 
hairs, three equally large from the mesothoracic, two large and one somewhat smaller from 
the metathoracic papilla, the same arrangement of hairs as is clearly shown on the first 
instar larva. Two of these large hairs arise from the more hollow side of the scoop, one 
240 
THE LATER INSTARS 
nearer the spine, the posterior hair, the other anterior to this, the anterior hair. A third 
hair, the dorsal hair, takes origin from the dorsal aspect of the convex outer surface of the 
scoop. This hair on the metathorax is the somewhat smaller hair of the three. The exact 
time of appearance and position of a fourth and minute hair is less certain. Such a hair 
is said by Macfie to be present on the metathoracic papilla from the third instar. In the 
scheme of culicine chaetotaxy as given by recent authors, four hairs, including a minute 
hair (no. 1 l), are given as present on the mesothorax group, but three only (no. 11 omitted) 
on the metathoracic papilla. In &des aegypti there is what is obviously the same small 
hair on both the meso- and metathoracic papilla. This arises just posterior to the dorsal 
hair in both cases. It may be called the accessory dorsal hair. I have found it in both 
segments only in the fourth instar. The anterior hair tends to become bifurcate or multi- 
branched as development proceeds. The other hairs tend to remain unbranched. The 
anterior hair appears to be hair 9 of the accepted chaetotaxy, the posterior hair no. 10 
and the dorsal hair no. 12. 
Space does not permit of a detailed consideration of the smaller hairs of the thorax and 
abdomen or of the degree of branching of the larger hairs. Generally speaking, whilst all 
the large hairs, including the lateral hairs (notably the lateral hair 6 on segments I-III of 
the abdomen) in the second instar become bifid, in the third they are trifid and in the fourth 
three- or four-branched. 
The pentad hairs are bifid in instar 2, and usually so are the siphon hair and the saddle 
hair. In this instar there are usually 4 cratal tufts and 2 precratal hairs in the ventral fan. 
In the third instar those pentad hairs that are branched in the fourth instar are trifid, as also 
is the siphon hair. The cratal hairs are increased in number usually to six with two pre- 
cratal hairs. 
OTHER EXTERNAL STRUCTURES 
The mental sclerite (Fig. 20 (7), (8)) has in the four instars respectively about 7, 9, 11 and 
13 teeth on each side of the median tooth. A point of interest is that the median tooth, 
which is proportionately very large and broad in the first instar, remains practically the 
same size up to the fourth instar though the transverse diameter of the sclerite as a whole 
increases by four or five times. 
The comb spines which are very delicate and number only about 5 in the first instar 
increase to 8 or 10 in the second instar with some further increase in number later, the 
new spines appearing beneath the cuticle in the position of the old. 
The early condition of the siphon has already been described. In each instar period to 
the fourth only an increasing fraction of the whole siphon in its distal portion becomes 
dark and sclerotised. The proportion so hardened in the respective instars is approxi- 
mately at the time preceding ecdysis O-15, 0.25, 0.67, 0.70 and in the fourth instar l-0. The 
pecten spines in the early instars are wholly or mainly on the soft membrane basal to the 
hard portion (Fig. 17 (4), (5), (6); Fig. 19 (9)), some 4 or 5 spines being present, however, 
on the hard portion in the third instar. The number of pecten teeth in the respective instars 
is about 6,7-10, 12-15, 12-20. As noted by Macfie, both the comb scales and pecten teeth 
change somewhat in the successive instars. This change is mainly in the increased 
lengthening and strengthening of the main tooth (Fig. 20 (6)). 
The saddle plate remains much the same proportionate size until at the fourth instar it 
increases from being restricted to the dorsal surface until it nearly covers the anal segment 
16 241 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
dorsally and laterally. The dorsal hairs also usually remain unbranched until the final instar. 
A common condition, however, in the third instar is for one, or more rarely both inner hairs, 
that is the more dorsal of the hairs, to have one thin branch. 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
Little change in internal structure occurs until, in the fourth instar, development of the 
future pupal structures begins. The compound eyes and the optic lobes begin to form in the 
late third instar, but appreciable development in these structures takes place only in the 
fourth instar. The imaginal buds at the bases of the pleural hairs become apparent in the 
second instar and are quite conspicuous in the third, though their main development is a 
feature of the fourth instar. The gonads are already evident in the sixth segment in the third 
instar, when also the buds of the developing gonocoxites become apparent. 
(e) THE PREPUPA 
During the fourth instar period the leg, wing and some other rudiments which have so far 
been enclosed in sacs as germinal buds become everted to appear as rough models of their 
final form. Especially the long cylindrical columns of the leg rudiments, towards the end 
of the instar, extend in loops over the lateral and ventral aspects of the thorax, concealing 
much of the real larval body (Fig. 21 (2), (3) a, b). Further, in this stage the hypodermis, 
as is very obvious in sections, becomes more and more separated from the larval cuticle 
and also different in form, leading ultimately to a condition in which the larva is little more 
than the roughly sculptured body of the future imago disguised in a larval skin. Such a 
condition in the mosquito indeed so closely resembles in many respects that which has been 
termed the prepupa in the higher Diptera (Wigglesworth, 1942) that this term may usefully 
be applied to the later stages of the fourth instar in the mosquito if only to emphasise how 
important in the post-embryonic development these changes are. It is, in fact, in the later 
stages of the fourth instar, not in the pupa, that the main outlines of the future imago are 
moulded. The pupa, as will be seen, with some exceptions to be noted, is merely the parts 
as they exist in this stage cemented together to form a simulacrum of an actual body proper 
to that stage. In this connection attention may be drawn to the paper by Giles (1903), 
entitled ‘On the prepupal changes in the larvae of Culicidae’, one of the few contributions 
dealing with this important stage in mosquito development. A connected description of 
post-embryonic development will be given later. In the meantime some description of the 
changes taking place in this respect in the fourth instar will be helpful. 
DEVELOPMENT OF APPENDAGES 
The leg rudiments. In the opening sentence of the subsection the word ‘everted’ was used 
to describe the appearance of the limb-like stage of the leg and wing rudiments. This word 
does not, however, truly describe the process here involved and some explanation seems 
desirable. The germinal buds of the legs are typically present already in the third instar 
where they have all the characters of the classical ‘germinal bud’. In this stage and at the 
early fourth instar the buds form globular or pear-shaped sacs attached to the base of the 
pleural hairs (hairs 9-12) in each thoracic segment. They begin as a thickening of the 
hypoderm beneath these hairs. The edges of this thickening dip deeply into the subjacent 
242 
THE PREPUPA 
tissue carrying with them a thin layer of hypoderm which forms the sac. The portion 
excavated forms the rudiment proper (Fig. 21 (5), (6), (7)). The apex of the rudiment up 
to a late stage maintains its connection with the point of origin, that is, in this case the 
pleural hair base. The rest of the rudiment elongates and becomes bent upon itself. Its 
005mm. P-h W.r 
a 3 1 095mm. 1 
dvm W.r 
Figure 21. Showing imaginal buds of pre-pupa. 
Thorax of mature third instar larva showing imaginal leg buds. 
Ventral view of thorax of larva approaching pupation. a’, tip of tarsus (at or near pleural 
hair base) ; a, tarsus; b, tibia. 
The same lateral view. Lettering as in 2. 
Lateral view of thorax of third instar larva approaching ecdysis. 
Section of imaginal leg bud showing maintenance of connection of tip of tarsus with pleural 
hair base. Lettering as in 6. 
Schematic representation of imaginal leg bud. a, a’, tip and shaft of tarsus; b, tibia; 
c, femur. 
Showing recession of edges of opening of sac (ib”) due to moulding of thorax. 
Lettering: dvm, dorso-ventral muscle indicating limits of thoracic segments; har, halter rudi- 
ment; ib”, edge of imaginal sac opening; LX, labial rudiment; p.h, pleural hair base; p.h’, pleural 
hair base of oncoming instar; rt.r, pupal trumpet rudiment; S, sternite; W.r, wing rudiment. 
base, at the point where the excavating invagination has left it still in connection with the 
body of the larva, forms the eventual place of origin of the limb. The bent portion gives 
rise in its respective bends to femur, tibia and tarsus, the tip still at the pleural hair base 
being the tip of the tarsus or near this. In the later stages of the fourth instar the bending 
of the rudiment constitutes a loop which grows ventrally and continues to do so until it 
243 16-2 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
reaches the mid-line of the ventral surface of the larval thorax. The descending limb (a) is 
in all the rudiments situated anteriorly and forms the future tibia. The ascending limb (b), 
still situated at its tip at the pleural hair base or near this, eventually develops into the five 
tarsal segments. The femur (c) is formed from a more basal portion which is not visible 
externally. The general construction will be plain from Fig. 21 (6). Where the basal portion 
springs from the wall of the sac there develops a ring-like thickening which eventually 
forms the coxa and a second less marked ring indicates the position of the future 
trochanter. 
It still remains to explain how the rudiment comes into the position previously referred 
to as everted. Actually there is no inversion in the sense of turning inside out and what 
happens to bring the rudiment eventually to a free position is as follows. The apex of the 
rudiment is still lying near the pleural hair base. Around this is the circular fissure formed 
by the invagination which has excavated the rudiment, in other words the narrow opening 
of the sac. Originally this opening is quite small, but as the rudiment increases in size and 
the hypoderm of the general surface of the thorax is dragged upon and shrinks in the 
process of the moulding of the thorax as development goes on, this narrow opening becomes 
increasingly enlarged. Eventually the loop of the rudiment consisting of the parts which 
will eventually be tibia and tarsus is extruded more and more and eventually comes to lie 
free on the side of the thorax (Fig. 21 (7)). The original edges of the opening of the sac are 
now widely extended and eventually merely form a ridge around the rudiment or even 
cease to be apparent. The tip of the rudiment which will become the tip of the tarsus may 
eventually become detached and even dragged away from the pleural base beneath which 
it was situated. But even so it is not usually far away as can be seen from the figures showing 
the limb rudiments in the mature larva. Further, on the wall of the flattened sac destined 
in the adult to form a portion of the lateral wall of the thorax, there appear thickenings 
which represent the beginnings of the future pleural sclerites. In the eventual history of 
these thickenings lies the ontogenetic problem to be worked out of their homologies in the 
imago. 
The wing and halter rudiments. These differ from the leg rudiments in that they are more 
flap-like. In the course of the fourth instar the wing rudiment develops into a triangular 
flap covering the median portion of the lateral aspect of the thorax. Its further history will 
be dealt with in a later section. The halter rudiment is very similar in shape but smaller. 
The wing and halter rudiments lie respectively dorsal to the mid and hind leg rudiments 
and like these in their early stage are enclosed in sacs. 
The pupal trumpet rudiments. The nature of these organs has been noted when dealing 
with the tracheal system of the larva. They first appear as relatively small areas of thickening 
about the mesothoracic spiracular puncta and they develop rapidly as organs formed 
around the spiracular cords leading from these. They lie with their openings directed some- 
what downwards in the shoulders of the larva. 
The antenna1 and labial rudiments. These develop as large buds occupying considerable 
space in the head. The antenna1 rudiments lie in elongated sacs passing back as far as the 
compound eyes. The labial rudiments occupy a single sac which when fully developed 
forms a considerable mass lying behind the labial area of the head capsule. The tips of the 
rudiment, which will become the tip of the proboscis, lie in the lateral papillae of the labial 
plate of the larva. 
244 
THE PREPUPA 
OTHER DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN THE PREPUPA 
Some other changes relating to development of the imaginal body in the prepupa will be 
mentioned when describing the different larval systems. Among these the most con- 
spicuous is the early appearance and rapid increase of the future great thoracic imaginal 
muscles of the wings which complete their development in the pupa as also do the later 
changes in the alimentary system which bring this to the condition in the imago. Important 
changes also take place in the tracheal system, but these are most suitably dealt with in the 
chapter on the pupa. 
(f) DURATION OF THE LARVAL STAGES 
The times taken in the different instars added together should be that of the complete larval 
period. In actual practice determination of such data offers certain difficulties, notably 
that not only are the times largely dependent on temperature and other conditions, but 
also in cultures not all the larvae behave precisely similarly. Hence the results must usually 
be given on a statistical basis. For this reason it will be desirable to treat separately 
determination of the total larval period and of that passed in the different instars. 
Many authors have given estimates, often of a rather general nature, as to the duration of 
the complete larval period. Francis (1907) gives the minimum period at constant tempera- 
ture 80” F. (27” C.) as 7 days. Mitchel (1907) gives 8 to 13 days in fairly warm weather. 
Newstead and Thomas (19 10) give 9 days at 23” C. Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912) quote 
the following : Reed and Carroll, 6 days; Agramonte, 10 days ; Taylor, 9 days ; Dupree and 
Morgan, 6-8 days. Howlett (1913), gives the shortest period as 5 days, the longest 22 days, 
on the average a week. Macfie (1915) gives for the larval period 7-l 3 days and (1916) in 
a tropical climate with sufficient food, 7 days. Many authors also refer to great extension 
of the period under certain conditions, for example Macfie (19 15, 19 16) gives up to 
100 days, Bacot (1916) up to 70 days, and Bonne-Wepster and Brug (1932) up to 60 days. 
Usually such periods are the result of starvation. Shannon and Putnam (1934) give mean 
periods based on careful statistical data of 6.4 days (154 hours) from eclosion to pupation 
at 27” C. and 7 days for this period at 23-26” C. 
Some very detailed figures are given by Trager (1937) and by De Meillon, Golberg and 
Lavoipierre (1945) in connection with larvae reared at 28” C. under sterile conditions on 
different essential food fractions. To express numerical rate of development Trager uses a 
figure obtained by multiplying the percentage of larvae reaching the fourth instar within 
9 days by the reciprocal of the average time in days required by these larvae to reach the 
fourth instar (N x l/t, where N is the first item and t the second). The higher the figure 
the more rapid the development. Such a figure in his tables ranges from about 3, corre- 
sponding to a 16.5 day period, to 32, or one of 7.5 days. De Meillon, Golberg and 
Lavoipierre give very similar figures for larvae reared on liver extract, yeast and vitamin B, 
namely from 6-8 days from first instar to pupation at 28” C. 
Putting aside those cases where the longer periods probably relate to adverse conditions 
the most usual period given lies between 6-8 days. Bacot (1916), giving 4 days for the 
minimum, however, continues by saying that males first appear on the fifth day, which 
would accord with our experience of cultures at 27-28” C., and probably is about the 
shortest time mentioned by any author. Though, however, this refers to the first males it is 
245 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
not the mean or usual period for pupation, which at 28” C. is about 144 hours or 6 days, 
though subject to variation within certain limits as discussed later. 
The most detailed account of the duration of the different instar periods is that given 
by Macfie (1917), though both Trager and De Meillon, Golberg and Lavoipierre give 
information in considerable detail in this respect in their tables. Macfie’s determination, 
made on 12 isolated larvae, gives for the time occupied by the four instar periods, 24, 24, 
Table 11. Duration of instar periods 
Hours I 
20 100 
22 100 
23 89 
24 67 
25 56 
26 44 
27 31 
28 3 
30 - 
42 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
52 
54 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
76 
78 
92 
94 
96 
98 
102 
117 
122 
139 
141 
144 - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- I Instars 
* 
II 
- 
1’; 
; 
56 
69 
97 
100 
100 
74 
37 
17 
27 
1’; 
+ 
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- III 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
26 
63 
83 
73 
100 
85 
100 
98 
100 
73 
60 
58 
32 
24 
17 
- 
9 
- 
6 
- 
- 
9 
- 
- 
- 
- IV 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
27 
40 
42 
68 
76 
83 
100 
91 
100 
94 
100 
100 
91 
50 
+ 
12 
+ P 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
> - 
- 
- 
- 
- 1 - - - - - - - - - f - - - - 1 - - - - - - - + - 
50 
100 
88 
100 Timing of stage 
All tist instar up to 20 hours 
- 
- 
- 
50 per cent ecdysis I-II 25-26 hours 
- 
- 
- 
All second instar 30-42 hours 
- 
- 
50 per cent ecdysis II-III 46 hours 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
All third instar 54-68 hours 
- 
- 
- 
50 per cent ecdysis III-IV 71-72 hours 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
First male pupa 102 hours 
- 
Bulk of males pupated 122 hours 
- 
- 
Bulk of females pupated 144 hours 
A plus sign indicates that a few of this stage were present in the sample taken but too few to show as a percentage. 
The cultures were from eggs hatched within 15 minutes. 
24 and 96-240 hours respectively. These times, except the last, correspond very closely to 
the times as given by me later. Since the length of time occupied by the instars is very 
closely linked with the study of growth dealt with in a later chapter a word may be said 
about the method used to determine this. 
To determine satisfactorily in a statistical fashion the duration of the instars and the 
times of ecdysis it is necessary to take into account the fact that in a culture in spite of 
every care that the larvae should be hatched as nearly as possible simultaneously (in a 
246 
DURATION OF LARVAL STAGES 
number of cases within 15 minutes and in one within 5 minutes) spread still occurs becoming 
more and more pronounced with each successive instar. Two ways of ascertaining statistic- 
ally the duration of the stages are possible. One is to follow the development of individual 
larvae. This has the disadvantage that it is difficult to ensure that the conditions of the iso- 
lated larva are those occurring in the culture and that it also necessitates a great many 
individual trials to cover the quite considerable range of variation. An alternative method 
is to make counts by sampling of the percentage of instars at different hours of culture, 
a method which does not in any way interfere with the progress of development of the 
culture from which the samples are taken. The results of such a series obtained from massed 
counts made from a number of cultures at 28” C. in which larvae were those hatched 
within 15 minutes or less are given in Table 11. From the table it is easy to see at any hour 
of culture what the proportion of instars is likely to be. 
Taking 50 per cent change as the mean time of ecdysis, it will be seen that each of the 
first three instars lasts almost exactly 24 hours. The first instar is very slightly longer as a 
rule, and the second especially is liable to be rather shorter. The fourth instar lasts approxi- 
mately from 68 hours, when the first ecdyses to the instar begin to take place, to 144 hours 
when, with a few abnormal exceptions, all larvae have pupated. From 50 per cent ecdysed 
from the third to the fourth instar to 50 per cent pupation was 50 hours. To 100 per cent 
pupation was 144 hours or exactly 6 days. The periods occupied by the different ecdyses, 
that is the time during which at least some forms will be found undergoing a particular 
ecdysis ending with the last larval ecdysis or pupation was respectively for the four ecdyses 
6, 10, 20 and 40 hours. * 
Even under standardised conditions slight variations in the time taken in different 
cultures did occur. Most noticeable were occasional instances of a more rapid complete 
maturation than usual. It was suspected that one cause of this was the previous history 
of the eggs though this requires confirmation. It would, however, be in accordance with 
Shannon and Putnam’s finding that time of conditioning affects not only the hatching time, 
but also the course of subsequent culture. In order to obtain as simultaneous hatching as 
possible the present results were obtained with eggs kept less than a week after collection 
and the degree of variation amounted at most to a few hours. 
(g) PUPATION 
THE ACT OF PUPATION (Fig. 21; Fig. 45) 
Ecdysis of the fourth instar larva, or pupation, differs from ecdysis in previous instars in 
that somewhat more extensive changes are involved since it results not merely in a larger 
and somewhat more developed larva but in the very different structure, the pupa. The 
process in Culex has been very fully described by Hurst (1890) and a great deal of informa- 
tion on internal changes given by Thompson (1905). In AZdes aegypti the process is as 
follows. 
As the larva approaches the time for pupation it develops a noticeable plump appearance. 
The thorax particularly is swollen due to increasing size of the wing and leg rudiments and 
also to greater accumulation of fat, the lobes of the fat-body being now almost contiguous. 
* Mijllring (1956) has made a similar study of the instar periods in Culex (autogenous and anautogenous) 
showing the period for each instar with overlap as shown here in Table 11. 
247 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
The leg rudiments are particularly responsible. These form loops directed ventrally and as 
pupation approaches they approach and reach the mid ventral line leaving only a small 
area of sternum showing (Fig. 21 (2)). Coincident with these changes the respiratory 
siphons lying under the cuticle in the anterior corners of the thorax become more and more 
conspicuous. These, at first colourless, take on a yellow colour deepening to brown and so 
give a good indication how far the larva is from pupation, brown siphons indicating an 
almost immediate approach to ecdysis. At this time too the float hair of the oncoming 
pupa becomes very obvious under the cuticle of the first abdominal segment. The larva 
further now rests at the surface, ceasing to use the feeding brushes. Hence whilst at the 
surface it does not glide forwards as do younger larvae. It still swims away, however, if 
disturbed. 
Just before the act begins, the larva watched from above shows a curious change in 
appearance as the compound eyes, previously not visible, are suddenly seen to be present 
as two black spots seemingly alertly watching over the anterior bulge of the thorax. This 
effect is the result of the head capsule splitting and the pupal head carrying the compound 
eyes being to some extent displaced backwards. 
Suddenly now the body gives a jerk and the abdomen comes to lie horizontally just 
beneath the surface. Within a minute or so the whole aspect of the insect is changed. The 
changes taking place are as follows. At the bases of the breathing trumpets, which are still 
under the cuticle, a small bubble of air appears. This is air entering for the first time the 
length of tracheal trunk linking the pupal respiratory trumpets to the position of the 
future imaginal mesothoracic spiracle as described later in the pupa. Air also now begins 
to collect within and at the distal ends of the trumpets as yet still directed downwards and 
under the cuticle. This air spreads, forming a band across the front of the thorax behind 
the neck (Fig. 45 (3) a). Suddenly other collections of air make their appearance. A bubble 
appears in the space on the ventral aspect of the thorax between the lower bends of the 
leg rudiments, that is over the small area of sternum left uncovered. Extensive air collec- 
tions are also seen behind and under the pupal wings. These last extend up under the wings 
to beneath the region of the halteres of the future pupa and will after pupation become the 
extensions of the ventral air space as described in the pupa. A band of air now forms across 
the base of the abdomen and air may even be seen elsewhere in the abdominal segments. 
All these collections of air occur before there is any obvious entry of air from outside due 
to tearing of the pupal skin. This, however, now takes place and the dorsum of the thorax 
is now seen to be formed by the exposed pupal thorax, the edges of the torn outer cuticle 
being pushed aside. This soon liberates the pupal trumpets, which spring out and make firm 
contact with the surface film. 
Meanwhile changes are taking place which end in the old head capsule being pushed 
ventrally and the whole pelt slipped backwards. By this stage the tracheal trunks have 
parted at their lines of weakness and have mysteriously been drawn out of the body so that 
they lie end to end in a line along each side of the abdomen. Being dark, this gives the naked- 
eye appearance of dark lines marking out the lateral borders of the stretched-out abdomen 
(Fig. 45 (1)). It remains only for the displaced cuticle to slip backwards and the paddles 
and other structures to be finally withdrawn for the pupa to be free. The whole process 
normally takes only a minute or so. Thompson gives 3 minutes for Culex. It is sometimes, 
however, delayed, usually from some disturbing cause. The liberated pupa, after discarding 
the skin usually remains for a short time with the abdomen horizontal. After a few minutes 
248 
PUPATION 
it retracts this part under the body and assumes the normal pupal appearance. It is, how- 
ever, at the moment of liberation very vulnerable and disturbance at this time may lead to 
it losing contact with the surface film and possibly difficulty in re-establishing this with the 
result that it drowns. 
When first emerged the pupa is white, but in a short time shows pigment changes as later 
described. 
THE MECHANICS OF PUPAL ECDYSIS 
As already noted at the time preceding ecdysis, ecdysial fluid has been secreted which has dis- 
solved the endocuticle of the cast-off integument, making this an extremely thin shell usually 
appearing only as a fine line in sections with a considerable space between it and the under- 
lying new cuticle. Whilst this is one function of such fluid there is, in this case, another 
which is important, namely that it is presumably the ecdysial fluid which is responsible in 
the mosquito for cementing the pupal parts together. An account of ecdysial fluid in this 
connection has been given by Tower (1902), who describes its cementing function in the 
pupa of Leptinotarsa (Col.). This author notes that ecdysial fluid is present at all ecdyses, 
but is especially abundant at the ecdysis leading to pupation. At the time of pupation 
material from the fluid is gradually precipitated upon the surface of the oncoming pupa, 
leaving a more fluid portion in contact with the old cuticle. When the cuticle ruptures and 
the fluid is exposed to the air it hardens and cements the appendages to the body. It seems 
very probable that in AtYdes aegypti a similar cementing action is brought about. But this 
does not explain all that takes place to enable the pupa to become at emergence the form 
bound together in the fashion it is. 
As already noted, the imaginal buds of the wings and legs are extended in the prepupal 
stage whilst still in the larva. The buds of the labral, labial and other mouth-parts are, 
however, at the time of commencing pupation still involuted and they are extended in the 
act of pupation. According to Thompson the extrusion of the long pupal mouth-parts may 
even be an important factor in rupturing the head capsule. Exactly how all the parts come 
to be cemented accurately in position as seen in the emerged pupa is not very clear. Ac- 
cording to Thompson the labral rudiment is bent forwards from its position over the dorsum 
of the head. This author also notes that there is a short period of delay after extrusion of 
the more anterior parts (labrum, mandibles and maxillae) before the labial rudiment is 
extruded, thus possibly allowing time for the transverse fold of the hypoderm carrying the 
mental sclerite to be withdrawn. 
The mechanism by which air as described appears in various parts under the larval 
cuticle is perhaps not so difficult to understand as might at first appear. Considerable 
volumes of air are ready to hand in the large tracheal trunks and as these are disrupted air 
may well follow or precede their fragments as these are dragged or squeezed out, for 
example, through the temporarily opened spiracular passages. Such air could then find 
locations in various spaces under the cuticle already provided by shrinkage or movements 
of the emerging pupal parts. 
REFERENCES 
BACOT, A. TV. (1916). Report of the Yellow Fever Commission. London. Vol. III. 
BHATIA, M. L. (1948). A simple medium for mounting mosquito larvae. Indian J. Malar. 2, 
283-4. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
249 
THE LARVAL INSTARS 
COOLING, L. E. (1924). The larval stages and biology of the commoner species of Australian 
mosquitoes, etc. Aust. Dept. Hlth Serv. Publ. (Trop. Div.), no. 8. 
DE MEILLON, B., GOLBERG, L. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. (1945). The nutrition of the larva of At?des 
aegypti L. J. Exp. Biol. 21, 84-9. 
FRANCIS, E. (1907). Observations on the life cycle of Stegomyia calopus. Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 22, 
38 l-3. 
GILES, G. M. (1903). On prepupal changes in the larva of Culicidae. J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.) 6, 
185-7. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (19 12). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (1913). Stegomyia fasciata. Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Mal. Comm., Madras, 1912. 
HURST, C. H. (1890). On the Life History and Development of a Gnat (Culex). Guardian Press, 
Manchester. 
JOBLING, B. (1938). On two subspecies of Culex pipiens L. (Diptera). Trans. R. Ent. Sot. 87, 
193-216. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1915). Observations on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 6, 
205-29. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1916). Rep. Accra Lab. for year 1915, pp. 71-9. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 
5, 47. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). Morphological changes observed during the development of the larva 
of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 297-307. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.). London. 
MITCHELL, E. G. (1907). Mosquitoe Life. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London. 
M~LLRING, F. K. (1956). Autogene und anautogene Eibildung bei Culex L. zugleich ein Beitrag 
zur Frage der Unterscheidung autogener Weibchen an Hand von Eirohrenzahl und Fliigel- 
lange. 2. Tropenmed. u. Parasit. 7, 15-48. 
NEWSTEAD, R. and THOMAS, H. W. (1910). The mosquitoes of the Amazon Region. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 4, 141-50. 
PURI, I. M. (1931). Larvae of Anopheline mosquitoes with full description of those of the 
Indian species. Ind. Med. Res. Mem. no. 21. 
ROUBAUD, E. (1929). Recherches biologiques sur le moustique de la fievre jaune. AL;des argenteus 
Poiret, etc. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 43, 1093-209. 
SHANNON, R. C. and PUTNAM, P. (1934). The biology of Stegomyia under laboratory conditions. 
I. The analysis of factors which influence larval development. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 36, 
185-216. 
TANZER, E. (1921). (In Tanzer, E. and Osterwald, H.) Morphogenetische Untersuchungen und 
Beobachtungen an Culiciden-larven. I. Morphogenitische Beobachtungen. Arch. Natur- 
gesch., Abt. A, 7. teil, 136-74. 
TATE, P. (1932). The larval instars of Orthopodomyiapulchripalpus Rond. (Diptera: Nematocera). 
Parasitology, 24, 111. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
TOWER, W. L. (1902). Observations on the structure of the exuvial glands and the formation of 
exuvial fluid in insects. 2001. Anz. 25, 466-72. 
TRAGER, W. (1937). A growth factor required by mosquito larvae. J. Exp. Biol. 14, 240-51. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1938). The absorption of fluid from the tracheal system of mosquito 
larvae at hatching and moulting. J. Exp. Biol. 15, 248-54. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Princzples of Insect Physiology. Methuen and Co., London. 
Ed. 2 (and subsequent editions). 
250 
XI 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
(a) PHYSICAL CHARACTERS OF THE LARVA 
Fundamental to behaviour of the larva are the physical characters not only of the environ- 
ment, but of its own body in relation to these. Some knowledge of physical data relating 
to the larva is, therefore, essential to a proper understanding of many features in behaviour. 
LENGTH AND WEIGHT 
Determination of body measurements and weight has been very fully dealt with in the 
chapter on growth. It is here only necessary to give a brief summary of these results. As 
first emerged from the egg the larva measures about 1.0 mm. in length and weighs about 
0.01 mg. At full size it measures to the base of the siphon about 7.0 mm. and weighs in the 
full-grown well-nourished female larva about 5.0 mg. The length and weight at the end of 
each instar are approximately as follows. 
Length Weight 
Instar in mm. in mg. 
I 1.97 0.0875 
II 3.24 o-313 
III 5.17 l-71 
IV 6.80; 7.33 3.29 ; 4.92 
The double figures given under instar IV relate to the male and female respectively. 
At the beginning of the instar both length and weight are approximately identical with the 
length and weight of the previous instar at the end of its period. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY 
Living larvae of AL;des aegypti are, due to the air spaces in their body, very nearly of the 
specific gravity of water. This is shown by the fact that at the point of the respiratory 
siphon when this is in contact with the surface film there is little or no funnel of depression. 
Actually there is a tiny portion of the spiracular parts projecting. How nearly the living 
larva is at about the specific gravity of water is also shown by observing larvae, for example, 
in a cylinder of water and noting how, when not actively swimming, they are at times to be 
seen slowly rising and at others slowly sinking. In general the large nearly mature fourth 
instar larvae sink when in the body of the fluid and rise only by swimming upwards. The 
younger forms under similar circumstances usually rise. In such observations it is neces- 
sary to use boiled or distilled water ; otherwise minute bubbles of O2 are liable to form on the 
hairs, mouth parts, etc. Even the smallest bubble has an obvious effect, again showing how 
nearly balanced is the weight of the larva and the specific gravity of water. Larvae also, 
though not actually swimming, may nevertheless be in motion due to the working of the 
mouth brushes. This may cause a larva to sink, sometimes very rapidly. Such action of the 
brushes never, or very rarely, causes a larva to rise. The body of the larva at rest is always 
251 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
oriented caudal end upwards whilst the action of the brushes is to propel the larva forward. 
The resulting effect is therefore for the larva to be propelled downwards. Only by using its 
body in swimming can it reverse this. 
The above remarks apply to the living larva. The dead or long-submerged larva, on the 
other hand, is usually heavier than water and sinks. If larvae be very carefully chloro- 
formed and the siphon then detached from contact with the surface film the same result, 
however, as with the living larva is obtained, that is the dead larva in this case is usually 
just a little lighter or heavier than water. On the other hand, larvae chloroformed, say on a 
glass plate, and transferred to water, sink, even if they are of the earlier instars. Further, if 
larvae killed by careful chloroforming when at rest at the surface are submerged several 
times they sink, though at first they may have floated. In the same way if some second 
instar larvae are placed at the bottom of a glass tube, say 4 feet long and closed at the 
bottom, and the tube then filled with water, or alternatively when filled after adding the 
larvae it is corked and reversed, the larvae will at once begin to swim upwards. But from 
time to time some will cease from swimming and then they will for the most part at such 
time slowly sink. These facts show how delicate is the adjustment of air space to weight of 
the larva. They also show what is presumably the effect of gaseous absorption by the tissues 
and that this is sufficient to tilt the balance from floating to sinking. 
Trials with solutions of sodium sulphate of known specific gravity give results much as 
above. Living larvae are of about the specific gravity of water. The larger forms chloro- 
formed at the surface mostly sink in sp. gr. 1.005 and 1.010 and rise in 1.020. In 1.005 and 
1.010 younger forms rise and cannot at first be made to sink, but later they equilibrate and 
do so. The larger forms chloroformed on a glass plate in the great majority sink in l-020; 
in 1.025 the majority sink but some rise; in 1.030 the majority rise and some sink; at 
1 a040 the majority rise and but few sink. 
The importance of specific gravity lies, however, not only in relation to the larva as 
a whole, but even more strikingly in respect to its separate parts. When describing the 
tracheal trunks of the larva mention was made of the large size of these in the abdomen and 
their sudden narrowing on entering the thorax. The effect of this will clearly be to increase 
the specific gravity of the thorax and lessen that of the abdomen as compared with the 
larva as a whole. That this is so is easily shown by separating with a sharp razor the head 
and thorax from the abdomen and placing these separately in water; the former promptly 
sinks, the latter floats. The actual specific gravity as determined in sodium sulphate 
solutions of known density is for the head and thorax 1.040 and for the abdomen O-982. 
This difference in specific gravity must have the effect on the body of the larva suspended 
in water of an upward and downward force forming a couple and it is not improbable that 
it is in the nice adjustment of the specific gravities of the parts as determined by the shape 
and size of the tracheal trunks that the balanced stance of the larva is brought about. It 
seems probable too that the characteristic attitude of the larvae of other species of mosquito 
may similarly be due to such adjustments (see Fig. 22). 
In favour of such a view is the fact that in a medium of specific gravity 1.040 the front 
part of the body no longer tends to sink and the larva, living or dead, orients horizontally. 
Further in such a case the living larva clearly finds the position objectionable and one in 
which it is unable to attach its siphon to the surface film. Thus the tapering of the tracheal 
trunks, which might seem a mere arbitrary anatomical feature, is one of vital importance 
to the larva and one which is related to other physical features of the larval body. 
252 
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
VOLUME 
Since the specific gravity of the living larva is near to that of water its volume stated in 
cubic millimetres should be approximately that of its weight in milligrams. Some determi- 
nations made on the living larva have, however, always given a somewhat greater volume 
than that so calculated. The method used for determination has been a modification of that 
used for determining the volume of the egg based on the method of Johnson (1937). The 
following are the results obtained: 
Observed Calculated 
r h , specific gravity as 
Material Weight (mg.) Volume (mm.3) weight/volume 
Five mature female larvae with respu-atory 29.9 36.7 0.816 
trumpets showing but not yet yellow 
Five larvae somewhat earlier than the above 26.7 33-3 04302 
Seven larvae instar IV, still earlier stage 29-O 37.5 o-773 
This would seem to make larvae much more buoyant than they appear to be and 
suggests that the volume figures obtained are too high. Though of interest, the matter has 
not been further explored. 
The only observations in the literature bearing upon the subject of this section appears to 
be an observation by Wesenberg-Lund (1921), quoted by Senior White (1926), stating that 
young larvae are frequently over compensated hydrostatically, older larvae being more 
often under compensated. This would be in accordance with our observations on AFdes 
aegypti. 
(b) HYDROSTATIC BALANCE 
ATTITUDE (Fig. 22 (1)) 
As with larvae of all mosquitoes, except in those few species that take oxygen from sub- 
merged vegetation, larvae of A. aegypti at all stages of growth spend much of their time at 
rest or slowly moving with their respiratory siphon in contact with the surface film. Whilst 
mosquito larvae are thus supported at the surface their body assumes a particular attitude 
which varies with, and is often characteristic of, the species. With some species the angle 
made by the body with the vertical is considerable and may occasionally approach 90”. 
That the larva of A. aegypti hangs almost vertically is a recognised characteristic of the 
species. The actual angle is about 20” from the vertical, varying somewhat at different 
stages and also whether the larva is at rest or in motion and the speed of such motion. In 
the sections dealing with specific gravity and volume such an attitude has been shown to be 
an expression of anatomical structure. 
USE OF THE SPIRACULAR PARTS 
Making and maintaining contact with the outer air and protection of the spiracular 
openings from entrance of water when so in contact, or when submerged, are the essential 
functions of the structures at the siphon apex. These functions are largely due to the 
strongly hydrophobic character of the inner aspects of the parts due to the waxy secretion 
from the peri-spiracular glands. When these parts are exposed by being opened up at the 
surface they therefore form a non-wettable area interposed into the surface film in the 
midst of which open the two large spiracular openings. Closing of the flaps is brought 
253 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
about by the action of the muscles, especially those inserted into the apodeme, traction on 
which brings all the parts of the spiracular plate together. 
But whilst closure of the parts is brought about by the action of muscles there seems to 
be little or no action by muscles required in their opening which is normally capable of 
being brought about through action of the surface film alone. Watson (1941) when de- 
scribing the spiracular parts says that the valves are held together by a relatively weak 
spring easily overcome by surface tension and even by the weaker force exercised at an 
oil--water interface, though with well-spread oil the tension may be too weak to do so. 
A 
2 
Figure 22. Physical characters of the larva. 
1 Illustrating hydrostatic balance. 
2 Apparatus used for determination of lethal temperature of the imago (see ch. XXV (c)). 
A somewhat similar apparatus but with a central vessel of water was used for lethal tempera- 
ture for the larva. a, glass tube for support and air outlet ; b, inlet tube for introducing material ; 
c, slip-in tube to block inlet when not in use; d, wet or dry filter paper; e, wool; f, circulating 
fluid for constant temperature; B, pipette for manipulating adults which are gently blown 
into end of the pipette tube before blowing into inlet at b. 
The mechanism is exactly as described. It may be studied and demonstrated very con- 
veniently with a glass tube of l&2 mm. bore bent twice at right angles and fixed on a slide 
with plasticine so that one opening can be brought under the objective of a binocular 
microscope whilst the level of the water in it can be regulated by pipetting water in or out 
at the other end. The siphon with the eighth segment of a well-grown fourth instar larva 
is severed with a sharp razor and placed carefully in an upright position just inside the 
opening of the tube. Water is now added to bring the level under observation to the 
opening. When this is achieved the siphon as it engages the surface film will open up 
automatically. Or if the flaps remain closed a touch on the siphon tube will cause these to 
254 
HYDROSTATIC BALANCE 
open in a manner as described by Watson such as to suggest the action of a weak 
spring. 
Though contact with the surface film is over a small area it nevertheless gives rise to a 
supporting force the strength of which will be evident on attempting to sink a chloro- 
formed larva with its siphon tip in position. An important point too is that whilst surface 
tension thus supports the larva at the surface, it allows complete freedom of movement in 
the horizontal plane since it in no way hinders such movement. Should the larva desire 
to sever the connection it has only to close the moveable flaps of the stigma1 apparatus to 
cut out surface activity entirely. 
Russell and Rao (1941) dealing with Anopheles larvae found the normal surface tension 
of the water to be about 70 dynes. (For pure water the value lies between 74.9 at 5” C. and 
7 1.18 at 30” C. (Childs, 1934).) When the tension was reduced by soap solution to 27- 
36 dynes the larvae failed to cling to the surface. A similar effect is seen with the larvae of 
AC;des aegypti in a suitable concentration of soap, the larvae becoming very excited at- 
tempting, but failing, to make adequate contact with the surface. The physical definition 
of surface tension is the force in dynes acting perpendicularly to a section of the surface 
1.0 cm. in length. The area of the expanded spiracular plate of a full-grown larva of 
A. aegypti was found by measurement to be approximately O-0514 mm.2. Taking the area 
as circular, this would give as the length of the periphery about 0.41 mm., or, by measure- 
ment of the outline of a camera lucida drawing of known magnification, 0.43 mm. The 
proportion of 70 dynes (this being the force over 1.0 cm.) would therefore be, over this 
distance, about 3 dynes. Or, taking the critical point as found by Russell and Rao as 
30 dynes for the fluid, about 1.3 dynes. This would be the force resisting withdrawal of the 
unclosed parts from contact with the film. 
In this connection, however, Wigglesworth (1942) refers to the possibility that the 
effect noted by Russell and Rao is the result of angle of contact (see section (j)). 
(c) MOVEMENTS 
Movements of the larva are very characteristic and Shannon (193 1) draws attention to the 
extreme restlessness of the larva of A. aegypti continually roaming through the container 
and distinguishable by such behaviour from all other Brazilian species except A. fulvithorax. 
This author also describes the characteristic looping movements and the small actual 
progress made when swimming. Actually translatory movements are of two kinds, 
namely swimming and gliding, the latter being brought about by action of the feeding 
brushes. 
The essential movement in swimming is similar to that commonly seen in larvae of 
mosquitoes, namely a side-to-side lashing movement of the whole body. This, apart from 
such bending as occurs mainly in the abdomen, causes a partial rotation in the horizontal 
plane of the body about a point in the thorax, the head being driven in one direction and 
the longer caudal portion in an opposite direction. The body in the larva of A. aegypti 
being rather long in proportion, such lashing movements give the impression of looping. 
Progression in this type of locomotion is invariably tail first. Thus larvae swimming down- 
wards from being at rest at the surface have first to manceuvre the body to get this into a 
suitable position. In swimming upwards the body is already correctly oriented and the 
larva swims upwards tail first. 
255 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
When in a fluid of density greater than water progression up and down may become 
difficult and the larva tends to go round in circles at the same level. 
The form of swimming by lashing of the body from side to side can be very clearly 
studied in the case of Anopheles larvae as they skim along the surface. Not only is the side- 
to-side movement of the head very evident as a result of the body lash, but also the back- 
ward propulsion. Movement is carried out here with much greater speed and precision 
than by the larva of ALides aegypti. This is probably partly accounted for by the fact that 
the energy expended by the larva is anchored strictly to the plane of movement. Further, 
the long body of the A. aegypti larva appears to be less favourable for such movement, 
hence the impression of poor progress. In contrast to lateral movement, upward and 
downward swimming appears to be more effective. 
Besides swimming in the manner described the larva is able to move at a quite consider- 
able rate, at times up to a centimetre or more per second, through the action of its feeding 
brushes. When working, these cause the larva to move forward smoothly and apparently 
without effort. Such movement may be seen when larvae are at the surface and their 
siphons in contact with the surface film, or when browsing at the bottom or on the sides 
of the vessel, the brushes in the latter case evidently dislodging and sweeping up particles 
to be swept into the pharynx. When so gliding the body of the larva lies nearly parallel to 
the surface over which it is passing, thus differing from its normal body attitude. This, 
however, is not a static condition and is due to the forward movement, as is shown by the 
fact that the angle made is largely dependent on the speed at which the larva is moving. 
Moving slowly the body has much the ordinary resting attitude. As speed increases, the 
line of the body becomes more and more horizontal. At times the additional urge from 
increased speed causes the body to bend before the movement is fully transmitted. 
In the larvae of A. communis Hocking (1953) found that wriggling locomotion was 
rarely used in natural circumstances, most movements being by the feeding brushes. 
(d) FEEDING 
Feeding may be carried out in three entirely different ways, namely (1) by pharyngeal 
filtration of minute particles from currents produced by the brushes in the body of the 
medium, (2) by the gnawing and swallowing of solid particles of food using the mandibles, 
and (3) by browsing. 
The first method which is characteristic of all mosquito larvae, except those of purely 
carnivorous habits, is naturally much in evidence with larvae of A. aegypti. Nevertheless, 
it is very largely supplemented in this case by the other methods, the relatively small 
head of the A. aegypti larva probably being an indication that the species is not one 
that specialises on feeding on very fine matter in suspension as are some open-water 
feeders such as Culex vishnui, where the head is very large, presumably to accommodate a 
correspondingly large pharynx (see p. 289). It is true that the larvae of A. aegypti are 
commonly found in clean drinking water, for example in native water pots, cisterns, etc. 
But in such situations there is usually a copious deposit of fragments of food and other 
organic debris. Further, it is doubtful how far the species could thrive in such a medium 
as clean water in the absence of fairly heavy organic contamination, as will be apparent 
when dealing with starvation effects. 
256 
FEEDING 
On the other hand, feeding on particulate matter present in the sediment at the bottom, 
of containers is a rather characteristic feature of the larva of the species, which may 
commonly be seen moving along the bottom worrying particle after particle in a manner 
very reminiscent of a dog. In this second method the larva can be seen using its mandibles, 
and the brushes are not concerned. 
The third method which may be described as browsing is also very commonly made use 
of where conditions are favourable. In this method the larva glides along the bottom or 
sides of the vessel propelled by its feeding brushes, which at the same time are used to 
detach matter from the surface over which the larva is gliding. Such detached matter is 
no doubt carried by the current produced by the brushes into the pharynx as in free feeding. 
This possibly explains why larvae so engaged usually stop abruptly every few seconds and 
start again on a new run, the bolus collected perhaps having to be disposed of. Larvae may 
browse in this way also on the surface film, though this is usually an indication of starva- 
tion conditions. Shannon and Putnam (1934) describe two methods of feeding at the 
surface. In one the larva retains its hold on the surface film by means of its siphon and 
bends the body up to use its brushes against this; in the other the larva swims ventral side 
upwards browsing on the film. The first is a common feature in starvation conditions. 
(e) REACTION TO LIGHT AND OTHER STIMULI 
REACTION TO LIGHT 
Of various reactions of the larva to stimuli that of negative phototropism is especially 
characteristic of the larva of A. aegypti. Shannon (1931), when describing the behaviour of 
this larva, notes as especially characteristic, over and above its extreme restlessness, 
(1) strong negative phototropism, and (2) extreme sensitiveness to vibrations and to light. 
Invariably in all circumstances and in all stages the larva at once begins to swim away 
from the light and to accumulate in that part of the container which is most remote from 
its source. When many larvae are present in a culture placed in front of a window or facing 
an electric light an extremely striking mass reaction takes place, the larvae swimming away 
from the illuminated side until brought up by the curved side of the vessel, which in turn 
directs them towards one spot, thus causing them to accumulate in a mass in a kind of 
focus at the point directly opposite the greatest intensity of light. Having to rise to the 
surface for respiration they form an ascending column of larvae which in turn creates a 
current. Moving up and driven forwards again towards the light by this current they again 
dive, only, on travelling a certain distance, again to join the throng. Such movement will 
continue unabated for hours. So delicate is the reaction to light intensity that where there 
are multiple sources of light the resultant column will act as an indicator of the greatest 
resultant illumination. Such intense negative phototropism, when first observed, was 
thought possibly to be due to the fact that the larvae were reared in the incubator and 
therefore in the dark. But larvae reared in daylight exhibit the same phenomenon and 
when cultures have been left undisturbed facing a fixed light a massive accumulation of 
larval faeces at a point opposite the light source shows how great a part of the larva’s time 
has been spent under the permanent influence of this taxis. 
A special study of the reaction of Culex larvae to light has been made by Folger (1946). 
He distinguishes an excitant and a directive effect. An interesting point is that with a 
17 257 CH 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
light below the vessel the larvae at the surface dive and so in this case swim towards the 
light. In respect to such a condition, however, it should be noted that the larva at the 
surface cannot swim upwards and the only reaction open to it when disturbed and seeking 
safety is to swim downwards. The excitant effect would thus appear distinct from any 
directive action and stronger than an opposite negative phototropic effect. Folger also 
observes that a decrease in light intensity is also effective as an excitant. The excitant effect 
is largely dependent on the rapidity with which the degree of illumination changes, so that 
a sudden light or a sudden darkening (shadow) both affect the larvae in the same way, that 
is they dive. 
As an index of negative phototropic effect Folger uses a figure obtained by dividing the 
number of larvae in the half nearer to the light by the number in the further half. To 
facilitate counting he uses black paper with a white line placed beneath the receptacle, 
namely a museum jar, 18 cm. by 6 cm. by 15 cm. deep, supported on a sheet of glass on 
a shelf in a dark room. An index of 1-O indicates indifference to light, any figure less than 
1.0 the existence of negative phototaxis. At 90-120 cm. (3-4 feet) the effect of an electric 
light gave as an average an index of 0.75077. At 10 cm. the index varied between 0.06 
and 0.71 (mean 0.31). Similar determinations for the larva of Agde,s aegypti would almost 
certainly be much higher, that is, a very low index, judging by the relative behaviour of the 
larvae of A. aegypti and those of Culex molestus. 
The visual stimuli which provoke diving and the visual acuity of the larvae of A&des 
communis have been investigated by Hocking (1953). According to Omardeen (1957) 
negative phototactic reaction increases with age to the fourth instar and pupa, possibly 
related to growth of the compound eye. 
An observation which may perhaps be considered in this relation is that of Jobling 
(1937) who records that AC;des aegypti, Culex fatigans, C. pipiens and C. molestus can all 
develop from the egg to the adult in complete darkness. Of these species AL;des aegypti was 
able in complete darkness to give rise to a second generation. The breeding of this species 
by the author has similarly been carried out in darkness except for occasional exposure 
during manipulations. Exposure to light may on the contrary be prejudicial in that this 
tends to cause the larvae to congregate at one spot in the culture. Even continuous exposure 
during the whole course of the culture does not abolish the reaction. 
REACTION TO TEMPERATURE GRADIENT 
Micha Bar-Zeev (1957), confirming results of Ivanova (1940) with Anopheles maculipennis, 
found that sensitiveness of larvae of Ad;des aegypti increased with later instars and pupa, 
the second instar congregating between 23” and 32” C. whilst later stages and pupae did 
so between 28” and 32” C. 
REACTION TO VIBRATIONS AND MECHANICAL STIMULI 
A prominent feature in the behaviour of larvae of A. aegypti emphasised by Shannon 
(193 1) and other writers is great sensitiveness to vibration and mechanical shocks. A similar 
reaction is noted by Folger for the larvae of Culex pipiens. Sensitiveness is, however, very 
much greater with AL;des aegypti larva than with that of Culex pipiens. Larvae of Ak;des 
aegypti accumulated at the surface will instantly dive if the side of the vessel is tapped to 
cause even the slightest jar. They behave in the same way if two hard objects are knocked 
258 
REACTION TO LIGHT, ETC. 
together even at a distance of feet or yards from the culture. In this respect the larvae, 
especially the nearly full-grown forms, are more sensitive than the pupae. By grading the 
intensity of the tap on the glass the larvae can be caused to dive, leaving the pupae still at 
the surface, a procedure sometimes useful in collecting the latter free from the former. 
The depth to which larvae under excitation by tapping will descend has been studied by 
Macfie (1923). At a tap on the tube containing larvae some descended 2%3* feet. Repeated 
tapping caused some to descend 8 feet. 
CLINGING OF LARVAE TO EMPTIED RECEPTACLES 
Though strictly speaking not a form of behaviour, there may be mentioned here a feature 
referred to by Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912) and other writers which will be familiar to 
anyone dealing with the species. This is the tendency of larvae to remain apparently clinging 
to the bottom when a vessel containing them is emptied. Such a tendency to cling seems to 
be due to the long lateral hairs of the larva becoming bound down by the surface film of 
the thin layer of fluid then left behind. The effect is no doubt greatly assisted by the action 
of the larvae in diving to the bottom of the vessel when this is handled and so largely 
remaining in the last remnants of fluid. It is doubtful whether beyond this the larvae take 
any active part in clinging. 
(f) RESISTANCE TO SUBMERSION 
Mitchell (1907) found that young larvae survived three hours’ submergence and could be 
resuscitated after five hours. Older larvae survived only Q-2 hours. Da Costa Lima (19 14) 
found that larvae of A. aegypti survived after considerable periods of submergence. One 
such larva lived submerged for 53 days. The younger the larvae the more easily they live 
without air contact. Very advanced larvae will die as a rule in less than a day. Deprived of 
their papillae they remained alive for some time in aerated water, but died in a few hours in 
boiled water. Sen (19 15) found that larvae of A. albopictus could withstand only 6-7 hours 
without coming to the surface. Bacot (19 16) noted that larvae of A. aegypti were unable 
to withstand complete submergence for 20 hours. Macfie (1917) placed mature larvae in 
tubes of 8 C.C. fluid sealed with a centimetre-thick layer of melted paraffin of suitable 
consistence. After 2 hours three Culex larvae were dead. After 6 hours three, and after 
7 hours four AL;des aegypti larvae were dead. Younger larvae survived longer. Lower- 
ing the temperature prolonged resistance. Presence of organic matter and boiling the 
water shortened it. The same author notes that young larvae may live for many days, 
increase in size, moult and develop fully submerged in running water. Da Costa Lima 
similarly records that larvae of A. aegypti can live submerged for long periods in running 
water. Such larvae after a time ceased to search for air, but on exposure to air quickly 
attached themselves to the surface film in the usual manner. Carter (1923) found that larvae 
of A. aegypti will live 2-3 days under a film of petroleum, but not the pupae. Kalandadse 
(1933) found that fourth instar larvae of this species in a receptacle closed to air access with 
a glass sheet begin to die at 7 hours and were all dead after 22 hours. Young larvae began 
to die after 22 hours. The larvae were more resistant than the pupae which began to die in 
2 hours, all being dead in 20 hours. In all such experiments it is very important that forma- 
tion of oxygen bubbles liberated by the least rise of temperature should not take place. 
It is, however, larvae of the first instar which most strikingly and uniformly exhibit 
259 17-2 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
resistance to submergence. As shown by Wigglesworth (1938) larvae of A. aegypti when 
first hatched from the egg are capable of living even without air entering the tracheae for 
several days. In the present author’s experience larvae hatched from eggs in boiled water 
under a thick layer of liquid paraffin remain alive and active for days. Nevertheless, dis- 
solved oxygen in some amount is evidently necessary, since if special steps beyond boiling 
be taken to free water from oxygen such larvae quickly die. Thus, when using a small tube 
with boiled water (Johnson’s volume determinating apparatus) first instar larvae in the 
closed limb frequently died during manipulations whilst those in the open limb still 
remained alive. Similarly under strictly anaerobic conditions (Bulloch’s apparatus as for 
anaerobic growth) all are usually dead overnight. 
(g) FOOD REQUIREMENTS OF THE LARVA 
The food requirements of the larva is a subject that has received much attention and may 
be briefly summarised. There is first the question of the physical nature of the food. 
A number of authors have attempted unsuccessfully to rear larvae on food in solution or 
in the colloidal state. Matheson and Hinman (1928), after many trials, obtained some 
development of Aede,s aegypti larvae in pond-water filtrate, but came to the conclusion that 
solutes and colloids are not a source of nourishment to mosquito larvae. De Meillon, 
Golberg and Lavoipierre (1945) also note that larvae from sterilised eggs in neutral broth, 
though they may remain alive several days, do not grow. Trager (1935b) found that larvae 
did not develop in 1 per cent Loeffler’s serum, but later (1936) showed that larvae could be 
reared at least to the fourth instar if a certain amount of CaCl,, and an organic growth 
factor shown to be a solute, were present. It seems clear, however, from the author’s 
results that such a diet did little more than continue existence under starvation conditions 
and only a proportion of the larvae it would seem reached even to the fourth instar. It 
might be as the author suggests, that though the brushes would not be effective, the larvae 
could still swallow and so obtain some food matter in this way. 
Quite apart from the question of food requirements it would seem very unlikely that 
larvae with their special mechanism for feeding, that is filtration of particles by the fringes 
of the pharynx and the accumulation of such matter in a bolus to be swallowed, would be 
able to obtain adequate nourishment by swallowing fluid medium. It may safely be said 
therefore that solutes and colloids are not normally the source from which larvae obtain food. 
Bacot (19 16) and Atkin and Bacot (1917) pointed out that bacteria and yeasts are an 
esssential food requirement of the larva and reared larvae on pure cultures of yeast. Dead 
bacteria or dead yeast they found had little value. Since these early researches there have 
been numerous observations which appeared to show that the food of mosquito larvae was 
inadequate unless this contained living bacteria and yeasts. Hinman (1933) failed to rear 
larvae on autoclaved material and considered living bacteria necessary. Rozeboom (1935) 
found that sterilisation rendered media unsatisfactory for development and that, whilst no 
development took place in sterile blood medium, contamination rendered this and other 
media satisfactory. MacGregor (1929) reared larvae on sterile bread, but his results have 
not been confirmed. Neither Hinman nor Rozeboom were able to rear larvae beyond the 
second instar using MacGregor’s sterile bread technique. There seems no doubt that 
bacterial organisms and yeasts are an important, if not essential, food requirement and all 
satisfactory methods of culture clearly provide this in the form of fluids containing organic 
260 
FOOD REQUIREMENTS 
matter in which organisms are freely growing. Lewis (1933) sprinkles bread crumbs on the 
surface once in three days. If too much is used, scum forms and the larvae are killed; if too 
little is used, pupation ceases. Johnson (1937) uses powdered breakfast food as more con- 
venient than yeast. MacGregor (1915) adds every alternate day a pellet of guinea-pig’s 
faeces. Bonne-Wepster and Brug (1932) also found guinea-pig’s faeces the most suitable 
food. Weyer (1934) used dried blood and powdered calf’s liver and obtained vigorous 
adults, but not apparently under sterile conditions. MacGregor (19 15) records cannibalism 
among larvae of A. aegypti, but this would not appear to be a usual feature of the species 
which does not exhibit carnivorous propensities. 
The above would seem to bring the larvae of A. aegypti into the class of phytophagous 
insects. In such a connection Uvarov (1928) notes that a form of food taken very commonly 
by phytophagous insects is decaying vegetable matter, but that the actual food may not be 
the substance most obviously taken in. Thus in the food of Drosophila yeasts are always 
present and in their absence Drosophila develops slowly. The Cecidomyid Miastor living 
on bark feeds on the micro-organisms present and can be bred on agar culture but not on 
sterile bark. 
Whether protozoa can provide an adequate dietary has been investigated by several 
authors. Barber (1928) reared larvae on pure cultures of Colpidium sp. and of Paramecium 
sp., but failed to produce adult insects. Mathis and Baffett (1934), however, found that 
though larvae died in 7-8 days in nutrient broth, full development occurred when a sterile 
culture of Euglena was added. 
So far nothing has been said of the chemical nature of substances essential to satisfactory 
growth. For this it is necessary to turn to the work more especially of Trager (1935-7) 
and of De Meillon and his collaborators. Briefly Trager has shown that mosquito larvae 
require at least two growth-promoting substances. One is present in large amount in 
yeast, is alkali stable and like vitamin B, is heat stable. The heat labile vitamin B1 is not 
required by Aedes aegypti larvae. The second factor is present in substances effective against 
secondary anaemia. It is heat stable in neutral or slightly acid solutions and sensitive to 
prolonged alkali action even at room temperature. Buddington (1941) found that B1 
(thiamin hydrochloride) was ineffective, as also that B1 and B, separately or together with 
yeast failed to bring larvae beyond instar IV, though with autoclaved yeast and liver 
extract 80 per cent reached the adult stage. 
De Meillon, Golberg and Lavoipierre (1945) found that filtered liver extract improved 
growth and survival rates. Furthermore, they called attention to a factor which is necessary 
for emergence of vigorous adults. This factor is largely absent from many artificial media 
such as brewer’s yeast and liver extract. They note that in nature it is unusual to find a 
weak adult, that is, one which cannot rise from the water. But in yeast and liver extract 
growth this is common. Later Golberg, de Meillon and Lavoipierre (1945) identified this 
substance with folic acid. Lichtenstein (1948) also found folic acid to be an essential food 
requirement for larvae of Culex molestus. 
Folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) is identical with vitamin M necessary for monkey 
growth, B, vitamin essential to growth of the chick and the Norite eluate factor required 
for the growth of certain bacteria. It occurs in liver, yeast and many articles of diet (Subba 
Row 1946). * 
* See also Golberg and De Meillon (1947, 1948). An important paper dealing with amino-acid requirements 
and giving references is that by Dimond, Lea, Hahnert and De Long (1956). 
261 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
The procedure recommended for rearing Agdes aegypti has been described in the chapter 
on technique. The culture medium there described clearly provides all that is necessary for 
optimum development, namely, food material in fine suspension and in coarser particles 
as sediment with yeasts and bacteria growing freely in an organic medium. Addition of a 
pharmaceutical liver extract has been tried, but with no appreciable difference in growth. 
Two cultures made under strictly comparable conditions side by side gave as the mean 
weight for females with liver extract and without respectively 2.43 and 2.44 mg. and for 
males 1.24 and l-23 mg. The opportunity may be taken here to emphasise the points: 
(1) that by dog biscuits a certain type of biscuit has been indicated; (2) that the ingredients 
include bemax; and (3) that the solid ingredients are finely ground. It is believed from 
considerable experience that growth in such a medium is optimal. Whether addition of any 
substance could increase growth is not known. In this, as in all questions of nutrition of 
the species, the use of weight and wing length as a criterion is essential (see chapter XVII). 
Table 12. Data recorded in the literature regarding lethal temperature 
for larvae of diJ&erent species of mosquito 
Lethal temperature in 
’ C. after exposure of 
r * , 
Species Author 5 minutes 1 hour Remarks 
Anopheles gambiae De Meillon (1934) - Over 45 Breeding in nature at 39” C. 
Anopheles funestus De Meillon (1934) - Under 45 - 
Anopheles insulae-florum Muirhead Thomson ( 1940) 40 - - 
Anoiheles minim& 
Anopheles hyrcanus 
Anopheles barbirostris 
Anopheles culicifacies 
Anopheles vagus 
Anopheles subpictus 01 
Anopheles Iudlowi 
Anopheles bifurcatus 
Aedes detritus 
Theobaidia annulata 
Culex pipiens 
Anopheies pharoensis 
AL;des aegypti 
Atides aegypti Muirhead Thomson (1940) 41 - 
Muirhead Thomson (1940) 43-43.5 - 
Muirhead Thomson (1940) 43.5 - 
Muirhead Thomson (1940) 44 - 
Muirhead Thomson (1940) 44.545 - 
Brues (1939) - - 
Wright (1923) 37 35 
Wright (1923) 42 37 
Wright (1923) 36 35 
Wright (1923) 4041 - 
Bates (1949) - 40 
Marchoux et al. - 39 
Macfie (1920) 43 - - 
Tropical species 
- 
- 
- 
Breeding in nature at 
39-40” c. 
- 
Temperate species 
- 
- 
Subtropical species 
Tropical and subtropical 
species 
Tropical and subtropical 
species 
(h) EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE 
LETHAL EFFECT OF HIGH TEMPERATURE 
The temperatures found lethal to larvae of a number of species of mosquitoes as determined 
by different observers are given in Table 12. The results show that for short exposures this 
is usually about 40”--45” C. For longer exposure it may in some cases be as low as 35” C. 
It is difficult to give a precise thermal death point since the result is liable to vary with the 
conditions of the test and that within a considerable range the lethal effect has to be 
expressed as a percentage. Macfie (1920) found that larvae apparently dead may recover. 
Muirhead Thomson (1940) notes that his results have been obtained after raising the 
temperature gradually. 
Most of the results given in Table 12 refer to different species of Anopheles and Culicines 
from temperate regions. A very careful and detailed account of the effect of high tempera- 
262 
TEMPERATURE 
ture on the larva of A?des aegypti is, however, given by Macfie (1920) whose general results 
have been given as an average figure of 43” C. in Table 12. This author, however, 
found that a temperature of about 47” C. was necessary in an exposure of a few minutes to 
give complete lethality with no recoveries. For exposure of 15 minutes 45” C. was neces- 
sary for complete effect, though a temperature of 41” C. gave considerable mortality. For 
30 minutes exposure 43” C. was completely effective, which is the figure given in the table. 
For more prolonged exposure a temperature of 39” C. produced considerable mortality 
and this temperature is that given as lethal by Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903). 
Headlee (1942) also gives 39” C. as lethal, in that larvae were dead in 5 days at 102” F. 
(38.9” C.). 
Table 13. Lethal e&Gect of high temperature on larvae of 
Aedes aegypti 
Periods of exposure 
3 minutes 15 minutes 30 minutes 60 minutes 
Temperature & L \ I A I A c \ \ 
(” c-1 a b a b a b a b 
47 100 100 100 100 100 100 - - 
46 90 100 100 100 - - _ - 
45 70 30 100 100 - - - - 
44 11 44 100 88 - - _ - 
43 27 27 100 67 100 100 - - 
42 8 7 73 53 100 - - - 
41 - - 60 50 25 45 - - 
40 - - 0 0 25 42 34 38 
39 - - - - - - 8 42 
a Number apparently dead 
b Number dead overnight. at end of experiment. 
In Table 13 are given the results of 3, 15, 30 and 60 minutes’ exposure in which larvae 
filtered off on filter paper were added to fluid at the temperatures noted. About twenty 
three-quarters-grown fourth instar larvae were used for each determination and the 
numbers immobilised at the end of the experiment noted (first column of figures), as also 
the percentage found dead after exposure and being kept overnight at room temperature 
(second column of figures). The results are very close to those obtained by Macfie. The 
temperature required for complete effect was 46” C. for 3 minutes’ exposure, 45” C. for 
15 minutes, 43” C. for 30 minutes. Lethal effect ceased at 41 O C. for 3 minutes’ exposure, 
40” C. for 15 minutes and there was 42 per cent eventual mortality with 39” C. for an 
hour, the number apparently dead at the end of the experiment being only 8 per cent. 
LETHAL EFFECT OF LOW TEMPERATURE 
Trofimov (1942) records that the larvae of Anopheles pulcherrimus and A. bzjkrcatus 
(A. claviger) resisted temperatures of - 5” C. to -9” C. from 20 to 210 minutes. This 
observer also makes the observation that the haemolymph of the larvae freezes at - 0.5” 
to - 0.7” C. Records of Anopheles larvae in nature surviving when frozen in ice have not 
infrequently been made. M. G. Wright (1901) in England found Culex larvae at 29” F. 
( - 1.7” C.) alive unless frozen in ice. 
Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903) note that larvae of Ai;des aegypti are not 
killed by short exposure to 0” C. Bliss and Gill (1933), who give a good resume of early 
work on the effect of low temperature on the larvae of A. aegypti record that the larvae will 
263 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
recover after being encrusted in ice. They found that larvae frozen for 2-10 hours at - 2” C. 
recovered in 2-3 hours. Those frozen for 11 hours or more did not recover. Bacot (1916) 
found that exposure to 4.4” C. for 2-3 hours caused larvae of A. aegypti to become dormant 
at the bottom of the vessel. They resumed activity at 27” C. Ramsay and Carpenter (1932) 
found that A. aegypti larvae survived freezing over 8 hours, but not 24 hours 
As noted by Bacot the effect of exposure to low temperature is to cause larvae to become 
sluggish in their movements and, if sufficiently low, to become motionless and apparently 
dead. In observations by the present writer first instar larvae when immobilised were for 
the most part found lying inert and submerged. Older larvae are usually found floating inert 
or entirely motionless at the surface with their siphon in contact with the surface film. The 
following are observations on different stages of larvae at temperatures which might be 
considered lethal or on the border line. The temperatures are those of the water. 
First instar 
7” C. Larvae sluggish or motionless. Remained so throughout early instar I. Some dead by 
fifth day. Many dead by seventh day and majority dead by ninth day. A few still alive (early 
instar I) on twenty-third day. 
1” C. After 24 hours’ exposure appeared dead, but 25 per cent recovered on placing at room 
temperature. After 48 hours there were no recoveries. 
Second instar 
7” C. Newly ecdysed second instar larvae placed at 7” C. At 24 hours very sluggish, just able 
to move, many floating with the siphon attached to surface film. On third day many recovered 
at room temperature. On sixth day larvae as first described and many recovered. On ninth day 
all larvae dead with no recoveries. 
1” C. At 24 hours all motionless and apparently dead. At 72 hours no recoveries. 
Third instar 
8” C. At 48 hours larvae sluggish, but made spasmodic use of brushes; tend to lie motionless 
around edges; some exhibited negative phototropism. 
7” C. At 24 hours as described for instar II. At 72 hours many recovered at room temperature. 
At 6 days many recoveries. 
1” C. At 24 hours all motionless and apparently dead. At 72 hours no recoveries. 
Fourth instar 
7” C. At 24 hours all larvae motionless, some showing sluggish movements on being disturbed. 
At 48 hours majority are motionless or dead floating with siphon at surface. 25 per cent re- 
covered motility at room temperature, but were feeble and later development was effected. 
Fourth day some showed feeble movement when placed at room temperature. Sixth day no 
recoveries. 
A temperature of 1” C. was lethal in most cases within 24 hours. A temperature of 
7” C. was still lethal in all cases, but only after from the sixth to the ninth day. Though final 
death was not observed in the experiment with third instar larvae, it probably occurred. 
The only partial exception was with the first instar larvae some of which were still alive on 
the twenty-third day. The experiments show that a temperature of 7” C. is well below that 
at which the species could survive. 
THE TEMPERATURE LIMITS OF EFFECTIVE DEVELOPMENT 
As distinct from the temperature which is lethal for short periods of exposure is the question 
of the temperature limits within which the species can exist, that is undergo growth and 
complete development. Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912) quote Reed and Carroll as stating 
264 
TEMPERATURE 
that at 10” C. young larvae of A. aegypti failed to pupate though growth took place. 
Gutzevich (193 1) gives as the lower limit for A. aegypti 17” C. Headlee (1940-2) gives 
temperature limits for the species’ continuance as 60-94” F., that is approximately 16”- 
34” C. At 54” F. and 102” F. (12”-39” C.) larvae do not mature. 
The following are some observations made at water temperatures of 17”-13” C. 
17” C. Larvae hatched from eggs remained active and developed slowly. Ecdysis to instar II 
took place on the fifth day; the larvae were half-grown instar III by the seventh day and pupae 
began emergence on the twenty-third day. 
14-16” C. Newly hatched larvae at 96 hours were still instar I, and at 144 hours were still only 
partly instar II. 
13” C. Larvae hatched from eggs at 96 hours were still half-grown instar I. All were dead at 
68 hours. 
The lower threshold for development seems therefore very precisely given by 16” C. An 
upper limit of 34” C. receives some support from the statement by MacGregor that adults 
hatched above 30.8” C. were small and feeble and from the data given above showing that 
exposure to 39” C. for one hour caused appreciable mortality. 
THE TIME-TEMPERATURE CURVE 
A considerable literature exists relating to the mathematical representation of the effect of 
temperature on development by the time-temperature curve. For information on this 
subject see Uvarov (193 l), Janisch (1932), Wigglesworth (1942), also earlier papers by 
Peairs (1914) and Ludwig (1928). For application to development in mosquitoes see 
Headlee (1940-2), Huffaker (1944), Bates (1949). 
Certain formulae, notably that of Blunk (1923), and of Janisch (1925), have been given 
for this curve. Such formulae are based on the assumption that between the limits of 
temperature at which development takes place this is proportional to the temperature. 
Blunk’s formula is t(v-c)=k, 
where t is the time of development, v the given temperature, c the critical temperature at 
which development ceases and k the thermal constant. Thus Bodenheimer (1924), taking 
optimum temperature as 27” C., the lower limit of development as at 17” C. and the time 
of development as 10 days gives as the thermal constant for A. aegypti lO(27 - 17) = 100. 
Janisch’s formula is 
t = m/2(aT + a-T), 
where t is time of development, m time of development under optimum temperature, a a 
constant, and T and - T the limits in degrees above and below the optimum. It is chiefly 
interesting in the present connection from the use made of it by Huffaker (1944) in following 
up the effect of variable temperature and the observations of Headlee (1942) in applying 
this to development of A. aegypti. For practical application it would seem from Headlee’s 
results that with variable temperatures ranging through some six degrees the time to 
emergence is very close to that for the mean temperatures. Thus for 16-22” variable 
temperature the days to emergence were 22 as against 225 for a constant temperature of 
19” C. For variable temperature 20-27” C. the time was 13 days as against 145 for a 
constant temperature of 24” C. 
265 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
A time-temperature curve for A. aegypti and for some other species of mosquito is given 
by Bodenheimer (1924). Gutzevich (1931) states that the curve for A. aegypti follows that 
given by Peairs for insects in general, and later (1932) gives a curve for the species under 
laboratory conditions of culture. 
EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON SIZE OF ADULT 
Whilst speed of development increases with temperature up to and possibly beyond 28” C. 
this does not apply to the size of adults produced. MacGregor (1915) notes that reared 
below 19.5” C. or above 30.8” C. adult A. aegypti were undersized. At 238” and 25.9” C. 
adults were equally fine specimens. Martini (1923) notes that mosquito larvae subjected 
to warm temperature produce smaller-sized adults than at cooler temperatures. This effect, 
whether as a direct result of temperature or working through food supply, is very commonly 
seen in nature with species of Anopheles. Not only are alpine and temperate species apt to 
be larger than those of hot climates, but individual specimens of the same species bred in 
cool and shady places are usually finer (and darker) specimens than those bred in open 
situations with higher water temperature. The same effect appears to be present in Ak’des 
aegypti in that specimens bred at somewhat low temperatures are commonly of larger size 
than those bred at optimum temperatures. As noted in a later chapter the heaviest and 
largest specimens were those bred at a water temperature of 23” C. At 17” C., though the 
time to emergence was three times that at 28” C., the specimens were at least as large as 
those bred at 28” C. Yet, as noted above, a few degrees lower and the species does not 
develop at all. 
(i) EFFECT OF STARVATION AND OVERCROWDING 
If larvae of A. aegypti are reared in absence of sufficient food the period of development is 
increased and the size of the resultant adults reduced. If starvation is nearly or quite 
complete, as when larvae are placed in clean tap-water, they may remain long periods up 
to a week or more with little or no development and may or may not hatch out as adults. 
If they do complete their development, they form the small or minute pupae and adults 
characteristic of starvation forms. 
Such forms are referred to by a number of authors, though most who do so give but few 
details. A special study of these forms has, however, been made by Weidling (1928). He 
describes the result of deficient food during the larval stage as leading to prolonged develop- 
ment, deficient size of adults, fewer ovarian tubes in the female, smaller egg measurement 
and fewer eggs laid. In regard to the larva, this author in a graph gives the normal well-fed 
larva as increasing in length during a period of 8 days to slightly over 7 mm. The starved 
forms increase at a lower rate, becoming stationary as regards growth after 10 days with 
a maximum length of 4 mm. 
The larvae under such conditions after a time, if starvation is severe, remain motionless 
at the surface supported by contact of their respiratory siphons with the surface film, an 
appearance quite different from the normal. Or if less severe they may be seen charac- 
teristically using their brushes to sweep the under surface of the film, bending up to do so 
whilst similarly supported and stationary. In very advanced starvation a curious feature 
after some time is that the larvae come to lie flat at the surface and not only so but their 
bodies come to be liable to be more or less extensively involved in the surface film showing 
266 
STARVATION AND OVERCROWDING 
that there has been some effect making the cuticle hydrophobic. As time goes on they lose 
all trace of fat and become almost transparent, so that structures within the body show 
with extraordinary clearness and the most minute ramifications of the tracheae are vividly 
shown up. Imaginal buds, even in the fourth instar, may be inconspicuous or apparently 
absent. Ecdysis may take place, but if starvation conditions are sufficiently long main- 
tained development beyond this is almost, if not quite, at a standstill. It would appear that 
even early fourth instar larvae placed in clean tap-water will pupate and do so more or less 
at the usual time, but producing minute pupae. With strict starvation, however, larvae in 
the earlier instars rarely survive to pupate. The minute pupae resulting show little difference 
in the size of the sexes, which may be scarcely distinguishable without examining the 
terminalia. Usually after a time the originally clean tap-water becomes faintly turbid and 
unless changed from time to time may eventually become a medium capable of allowing 
improved conditions. Third instar larvae starved in this way for 10-14 days have been 
made use of by Wigglesworth (1942) in his observations on reserve substances of the 
larva. The following are observations on different instars placed at 25” C. under starvation 
conditions (clean but not changed tap-water): 
Early instar II. 48 hours. Some circling at surface. 
6 days. Many still swimming. Two instars present heads measuring O-4 and 
O-6 mm. in diameter respectively. 
14 days. Larvae mainly at surface inactive. Water clear. No further ecdysis. 
30 days. Larvae largely dead. 
Early instar III. 24 hours. Majority swimming. 
6 days. Some swimming, some at surface. No skins, that is, no ecdysis. 
8 days. About half have ecdysed. The skins have been eaten with the exception 
of the head capsule and siphon. 
14 days. Larvae swimming and looking in fair condition. Water turbid. 
30 days. Larvae still alive, a good deal of debris in water. 
40 days. Some minute pupae. 
Early instar IV. 6 days. Pupated to minute pupae (14), nine larvae still present. Head dia- 
meter 1.08 mm. Weight of a female pupa 2.19 mg., of two males 1.83, 
1*77 mg. 
8 days. All but two pupated. 
12 days, Adults hatched out, but only one female and two males alive 5 days 
later. Female offered food took a long time to gorge and did not do so 
fully. Weak and fell on back in water on being transferred to tube. Died 
without oviposition or digestion of blood. 
The following are measurements made on larvae which 24 hours from hatching were trans- 
ferred to clean tap-water and examined 6 days (145 hours) later. Three instars were present, 
the largest presumably IV, since the head diameter was 0.89. The larvae were hanging 
motionless at the surface, obviously thin and transparent. Under the microscope they 
appeared a mass of tracheae owing to the absence of all fat. There was no trace of imaginal 
buds in the fourth instar larvae. 
Instar II Instar III Instar IV 
Measurement (mm.) (mm.) (mm.) 
Body length to 2.68 (2.60) 3.77 (4.15) 4.49 (7.05) 
base of siphon 
Head diameter O-58 (O-54) O-76 (O-74) 0.89 (O-97) 
Thorax breadth o-54 (0.57) O-76 (l-00) 0.94 (l-47) 
Siphon length 0.43 (0.38) O-5 1 (O-56) 0.69 (O-82) 
Anal papillae 0.36 (O-33) o-51 (O-57) 0.62 (O-86) 
267 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
The figures in brackets are the mean for normal pre-ecdysis measurements. There is 
clearly a progressive falling-off from the normal towards the fourth instar, especially 
noticeable in the body length and thorax measurements (62 and 64 per cent of the normal). 
The head diameter is 92 per cent, the siphon length 84 per cent and the anal papillae 
72 per cent of the normal measurement for pre-ecdysis fourth instar. 
A point that should be mentioned is that the first instar larva may be kept some days 
without food without apparently affecting future development. Bacot (1916) states that 
first instar larvae remain as such until organic matter is added. De Meillon, Golberg and 
Lavoipierre (1945) make use of this property by leaving first instar larvae hatched under 
sterile conditions in nutrient medium, in which they do not grow, for some days if necessary 
before transferring them to the food medium being tested. 
Overcrowding tends to, and may seriously, reduce the size of the mature larva, pupa and 
resulting adult. The limits at which overcrowding becomes apparent are difficult to deter- 
mine, but the numbers must be very considerable if conditions of culture are good, for 
example at over 1000 per litre. There is the possibility that too few larvae in a large culture 
may also give some reduction in size. 
(j) EFFECT OF SALT, pH, SOAP AND CHEMICALS 
Under certain conditions mosquitoes may breed in brackish water and the concentration 
of salt and sea-water that the larvae are able to withstand has been studied by a number of 
observers. For general accounts of mosquitoes breeding in brackish and saline waters see 
Balfour (1921), Wigglesworth (1933 a, b. c). The following are data relating to Ai;des 
aegyp ti. 
Macfie (1914) O-5 per cent salt. Little effect. 
2-O per cent salt. Many dead at 6 hours; all dead at 12 hours. 
2.3 per cent salt. Larvae rapidly killed. 
Macfie (1922) Pure sea-water. Larvae killed in 2-4 hours. 
50 per cent sea-water (1.6 salt). Larvae killed in 24 hours. 
Wigglesworth (1933 c) O-9 per cent salt or less. Larvae not affected. 
1-O per cent salt. Larvae die in about a week. 
1.3 per cent salt. Larvae die in about 72 hours. 
1.4 per cent salt. Larvae die in about 48 hours. 
Pantazis (1935) 0*5--1.0 salt per mille. Optimum salinity. 
5-O salt per mille. No development over this concentration. 
By gradually increasing the salinity Wigglesworth (1933 c) found that larvae of A. aegypti 
can become adapted to live in up to 1.75 per cent salt or sea-water equivalent. In 5-O per 
cent the anal papillae drop off (1933 b). If larvae reared in fresh water are transferred to 
salt water, the mid-gut cells swell and become detached. In larvae adapted to salt the gut 
cells absorb fluid but do not swell. If fed on stained particles, the cells in the salt-adapted 
larvae become crowded with granules; in the unadapted they are swollen and clear. 
Martini (1922) pointed out that larvae bred in saline water have short anal papillae and 
those bred in dilute acid long ones. The former statement applies also to certain mosquito 
species which habitually breed in nature in saline waters. The shortening is not so marked 
in A. aegypti as in Culex larvae, except as pointed out by Pagast (1936) in larvae brought 
268 
EFFECT OF CHEMICAL FACTORS 
from distilled water into very dilute salt, such as tap-water. A. aegypti larvae also, as 
shown by Wigglesworth, have a greater power than the larvae of Culex to obtain necessary 
salt from very dilute solutions; see also Gibbins (1932). 
There is little reason to suppose that pH has any marked direct effect upon the larva. 
MacGregor (192 1, 1929) found that pH of the medium had little direct importance. Senior 
White (1926) found larvae of A. aegypti in nature in waters with pH varying from 5.8 to 
8.6. Buchman (193 1) found that larvae of Culex pipiens could live in water at pH from 4.4 
to 8.5, but died beyond these values. Rudolfs and Lackey (1929) found pH to have little 
effect. Woodhill (1942) notes that at pH 36-4.2 the percentage of emergence is consider- 
ably reduced and the period of development increased for certain species including Ai;des 
aegypti. The time of development at pH 9.2-9.5 was only slightly longer than at pH 68-7.2. * 
Soap in suitable concentration has a lethal effect through so affecting the surface tension 
of the medium that the normal mechanism by which larvae contact the surface to obtain 
air is interfered with and the larvae eventually drown (Russell and Rao, 1941). Strickland 
(1929) found 4 per cent of ordinary soap an effective larvicide. This was much less effective, 
however, in the field. Shannon and Frobisher (1931) found that 1.0 per cent coconut oil 
soap killed larvae in an hour. 
The effect of various chemical substances on larvae has been widely studied with a view 
to obtaining effective larvicides (see section on control). Various forms and grades of 
mineral oil have been extensively used as larvicides and the various theories as to how they 
act are discussed by Freeborn and Alsatt (1918). To some extent such oils are lethal by 
reason of forming a film which cuts contact of the larva with air and kills by asphyxiation. 
But this effect is relatively slight unless in addition the oil has other effects. One action of 
such oils is that by wetting the hydrophobic, but oil wettable, areas at the apex of the 
siphon they pass on from this to wetting and entering the tracheal trunks. The effect is 
further enhanced if the oil exerts in addition a toxic effect. Films of non-toxic oils such as 
liquid petroleum have very little immediate effect. 
A study of the toxicity of kerosene has been made by Moore and Graham (1918). See 
also Freeborn and Alsatt (1918), who consider that it is largely the vapour which is toxic, 
oils being effective in proportion to the lowness of their flash point. A very good account 
of the action of oils and the factors concerned in their efficacy is given by Murray (1936) 
(see also Hacker, 1925, and Watson, 1937, 1941). The last-mentioned author notes that 
larvae will often themselves ensure contact of the oil with the hydrophobe surface at the 
tip of the siphon by nibbling there when they find obstruction in breathing. 
Wigglesworth (1930) has described the process of entry of kerosene into the tracheal 
trunks and finest tracheal capillaries. Within half an hour gas had completely disappeared 
from the tracheal system. The author notes that the oil has a strong affinity for the lining 
membrane of the tracheae as judged by the highly concave meniscus at the free surface of 
the liquid as it moves along the tubes. The surface tension of the oil will therefore exert 
pressure on the gas in the tracheal system which is driven into solution in the tissue fluids. 
Watson (1941), possibly with a different oil, found the advancing meniscus convex and 
considers that the oil is drawn in by the using up of oxygen by the larval tissues. He notes 
that larvae affected by oils in the tracheal vessels show paralysis of the heart action when 
water-soluble toxins are present in oils that are fat solvents. 
Though not in common use, if at all, as larvicides in practice a great variety of inorganic 
* For lethal effect of pH see Tanimura Seizo and Sonoji Hine (1952). 
269 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
and organic compounds have been found experimentally lethal to larvae. Matheson and 
Hinman (1928) found borax, 15 or more grams to the litre, a very efficient larvicide that 
might be used for water collections other than those used for drinking. The effects were 
permanent. Macfie (1923) found l-2 per cent lithium chloride lethal to larvae. Frobisher 
and Shannon (1931) and Shannon and Frobisher (1931) have tested a large number of 
substances to ascertain the extent to which they were effective. Cresols and related sub- 
stances killed larvae in 1 per cent concentration in 25 seconds. Some substances which it 
was suspected would be very lethal were surprisingly not so. In 1 per cent KCN full-grown 
larvae survived 1 hour. Ten per cent was fatal in 10 minutes, that is about the same as a 
corresponding KOH solution, though in greater dilution KCN was more lethal than KOH. 
Strong acids were very little lethal, 1 per cent sulphuric and nitric acid taking 75 minutes to 
kill and HCL 100 minutes. Ammonium sulphate was found by Brink and Chowdry (1939) 
in 0.75 per cent solution to prevent Culex fatigans breeding and to kill all larvae in 2 days, 
as well as being a fertiliser. Full-grown larvae, however, pupated and pupae emerged in 
2-O per cent. Yates (1946) found phenothiazine effective in one in a million, but the effect 
was erratic. 
Barber (1944) tested the effect of vapours of certain compounds against larvae. Carbon 
bisulphide was most rapid, toluene, carbon tetrachloride and benzene almost as rapid (fatal 
in 2-3 minutes). Phenol and kerosene vapour required 12-30 minutes to cause larvae to 
become stationary. 
The effect of gases and vapours has been tested by Williamson (1924), Barber (1944) and 
others. According to the former author first instar larvae of Agdes aegypti are an exception 
to the general susceptibility of larvae to gases and vapours. SH, in saturated solution 
killed larvae of Culexpipiens in 1 minute. Chloropicrin was also effective in great dilution 
(l-200,000). Chlorine in high but undetermined amount maintained for 3 minutes killed 
all larvae and pupae. Macfie (19 16) found chlorine 1: 10,000 lethal. 
The effect of some pure gases has been described by Wigglesworth (1930). Larvae in an 
atmosphere of CO2 within 4 or 5 minutes are completely narcotised. They recover when 
removed to a vessel of fresh water. Hydrogen has not this hypnotic effect, but through 
deprivation of oxygen the larva is rendered inactive in 10 or 15 minutes. Oxygen restores 
activity in less than thirty seconds. With narcotisation (CO,) or hydrogen asphyxia the 
gas does not extend to the finest tracheal capillaries as it does in simple asphyxiation. This 
is due to the absence of violent muscular contractions which in simple asphyxiation cause 
absorption of fluid in the tracheoles. Chloroform vapour acted comparatively slowly, the 
muscles contracting for about 2 minutes. CS, acted similarly. HCN wasmore rapid in 
action with little muscular movement. With ammonia the larvae were dead in about 
10 minutes. 
The plant fish-poison, Tephrosia vogelii, was found by Worsley (1934) effective against a 
species of Aedes, an alcoholic extract of the seeds l-300 being used. Chopra, Roy and 
Ghosh (1940) also found Tephrosia effective in a l-10 dilution of an acetone extract, all 
larvae being killed within 24 hours. A number of other vegetable poisons have been found 
actively insecticidal. A very valuable monograph on this is published by the Imperial 
Institute (1940). 
The use of larvicides applied as dusts, for example Paris green, DDT and other insecti- 
cides of the chlorinated synthetic type are more adapted for use against the adult mosquito 
and as larvicides in antimalaria work since the larvae of AL;des aegypti do not usually feed 
270 
EFFECT OF CHEMICAL FACTORS 
at the surface film. Also the breeding places of the species are not often suitable for such 
methods of application. Chopra, Roy and Ghosh (1940), however, found pyrethrum 
powder (a little scattered on the water) to be effective against larvae of A&Yes aegypti. 
Camphor or paradichlorobenzene used in this way has been suggested by Muir (1920). 
For an account of the chlorinated synthetic insecticides, see under ‘ Insecticides ‘, pp. 555-6 
in the chapter on viability (chapter xxv (e)). 
Lewis (1955) found benzene hexachloride used in cement pellets as described by Bruce- 
Chwatt effective in some of the coast villages in the Sudan where water was precious. 
In general larvae are little affected in short response to solutes in watery solution. Lipoid 
solvents in sufficient concentration are commonly rapidly lethal. Pupae will remain alive 
for long periods in many strong chemicals as a result of their waxy coat (see chapter XVI). 
But if given a preliminary short exposure to chloroform or other lipoid solvent they are 
rapidly killed under such treatment, the protective waxy layer with which they are coated 
being removed. In the pupa also the cuticular envelope is completely closed. In the larva 
not only is this envelope much thinner, but there are two points of entry not present in the 
pupa, namely by swallowing and by passage through the permeable cuticle of the anal 
papillae. 
Under the present heading may be included the observations of MacGregor (1926) upon 
the effect of electric current on larvae. These are violently affected by 100 volts passed 
through swamp water, showing muscular twitchings and loss of muscular control. They are 
not affected by 2-6 volts but respond to make and break. Entanglement of bubbles in the 
mouth-parts due to electrolysis causes the larvae to swim downwards and attempt to 
attach their siphons to the bottom. The explanation of the last observation is probably the 
following. As previously pointed out in the section on movements, progression in swimming 
is always backwards and that to swim downwards the larva had of necessity to reverse its 
normal orientation. With a large bubble making the.head end the lighter, any efforts unable 
to turn the head downwards must cause the larva to swim down and at the bottom to 
continue, as it would appear, attempting to attach its siphon to this. 
REFERENCES 
(a-f) PHYSICAL CHARACTERS AND RELATED SUBJECTS 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). Report of the Yellow Fever Commission (West Africa). London. Vol. III. 
CARTER, H. R. (1923). Comments on’paper by Connor and Monroe, 1923. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 
3, 16-19. 
CHILDS, W. H. J. (1934). Physical Constants. Methuen and Co., London. 
DA COSTA LIMA, S. (1914). Contribution to the biology of the Culicidae. Observations on the 
respiratory process of the larva. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 6, 18-34. 
FOLGER, H. T. (1946). The reactions of Culex larvae and pupae to gravity, light and mechanical 
shock. Physiol. Zool. 19, 190-202. 
HOCKING, B. (1953). Notes on the activities of Aedes larvae. Mosquito News, 13, 62-4. 
HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB (1912). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
IVANOVA, L. V. (1940). The influence of temperature on the behaviour of Anopheles maculipennis. 
(In Russian.) Med. Parasit. 9, S-70. 
JOBLING, B. (1937). The development of mosquitoes in complete darkness. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. 
Med. Hyg. 30,467-74. 
JOHNSON, C. G. (1937). The absorption of water and associated volume changes in the eggs of 
Notostira erratica L. etc. J. Exp. Biol. 14, 413-21. 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
KALANDADSE, L. (1933). Materialen zum Studium der Atmungsprozesse der Miickenlarven und 
-puppen etc. Arch. Schifi.- u. Tropenhyg. 37, 88-103. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). The limitations of kerosene as a larvicide with some observations on the 
respiration of mosquito larvae. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 277-93. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1923). Depth and the larvae and pupae of Stegomyia fasciata. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 17, 5-8. 
MICHA BAR-ZEEV (1957). The effect of external temperature on different stages of Aedes aegypti 
(L.). Bull. Ent. Res. 48, 593-9. 
MITCHELL, E. G. (1907). Mosqt. ito Life. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London. 
OMARDEEN, T. A. (1957). The behaviour of larvae and pupae of AEdes aegypti (L.) in light and 
temperature gradients. Bull. Ent. Res. 48, 349. 
RUSSELL, P. F. and RAO, T. R. (1941). On the surface tension of water in relation to the behaviour 
of Anopheles larvae. Amer. J. Trap. Med. 21, 767-77. 
SEN, S. K. (1915). Observations on respiration of Culicidae. Ind. J. Med. Res. 2, 681-97. 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1926). Physical factors in mosquito oecology. Bull. Ent. Res. 16, 
167-248. 
SHANNON, R. C. (1931). The environment and behaviour of some Brazilian mosquitoes. Proc. 
Ent. Sot. Wash. 33, l-27. 
SHANNON, R. C. and Putnam, P. (1934). See references in ch. x, p. 250. 
WATSON, G. I. (1941). A physiological study of mosquito larvae which were treated with anti- 
malarial oils. Bull. Ent. Res. 31, 319-30. 
WESENBERG-LUND, C. (1921). Contributions to the biology of the Danish Culicidae. Mem. Acad. 
Copenhagen, (8), 7, l-210. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1938). The absorption of fluid from the tracheal system of mosquito larvae 
at hatching and moulting. J. Exp. Biol. 15, 248-54. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). In review of Russell and Rao, 1941. Trap. Dis. Bull. 39, 427-8. 
(g) FOOD REQUIREMENTS OF THE LARVA 
ATKIN, E. E. and BACOT, A. W. (1917). The relation between the hatching of the egg and the 
development of the larva of Stegomyia fasciata and the presence of bacteria and yeasts. 
Parasitology, 9, 482-536. 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). See under section (a-f). 
BARBER, M. A. (1928). The food of culicine larvae. Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 43, 11-17. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). The subgenus Stegomyia in Netherlands-India. 
Geneesk. Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind. Byblad 2, l-l 19. 
BUDDINGTON, A. R. (1941). The nutrition of mosquito larvae. J. Econ. Ent. 34, 275-81. 
DE MEILLON, B., GOLBERG, L. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. (1945). The nutrition of the larva of Aedes 
aegypti L. J. Exp. Biol. 21, 84-9. 
DIMOND, J. B., LEA, A. O., HAYNERT, W. F. and DE LONG, D. M. (1956). The amino-acids 
required for egg production in Aedes aegypti. Canad. Ent. 88, 57-62. 
GOLBERG, L., DE MEILLON, B. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. (1945). The nutrition of the larva of Ad;des 
aegypti L. II. The essential water-soluble factors from yeast. J. Exp. Biol. 21, 90-6. 
GOLBERG, L. and DE MEILLON, B. (1947). Further observations on the nutritional requirements 
of At?des aegypti L. Nature, Lond. 160, 582-3. 
GOLBERG, L. and DE MEILLON, B. (1948). The nutrition of the larva of Aedes aegypti Linnaeus. 
Biochem. J. 43, 372-9, 379-87. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1933). The role of bacteria in the nutrition of the mosquito larva. The growth- 
sustaining factor. Amer. J. Hyg. 18, 224-36. 
JOHNSON, H. A. (1937). Notes on the continuous rearing of Aedes aegypti in the laboratory. 
Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 52, 1177-g. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1933). Observations on Ai;des aegypti L. (Diptera: Culicidae) under controlled 
atmospheric conditions. Bull. Ent. Res. 24, 362-72. 
LICHTENSTEIN, E. P. (1948). Growth of Culex molestus under sterile conditions. Nature, Lond. 
162, 227. 
272 
REFERENCES 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1915). Notes on the rearing of Stegomyia fasciata in London. J. Trop. 
Med. (Hyg.) 18, 193-6. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1929). The significance of the pH in the development of mosquito larvae. 
Parasitology, 21, 132-57. 
MATHESON, R. and HINMAN, E. H. (1928). A new larvicide for mosquitoes. Amer. J. Hyg. 8, 
293-6. 
MATHIS, M. and BAFFET, 0. (1934). Developpement larvaire du moustique de la fievre jaune en 
culture pure d’Euglenes. C.E. Sot. Biol., Paris, 116, 317-19. 
ROZEBOOM, L. E. (1935). The relation of bacteria and bacterial filtrates to the development of 
mosquito larvae. Amer. J. Hyg. 21, 167-79. 
SUBBA Row, Y. (1946). Folic acid. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 48, 255-350. 
TRAGER, W. (1935a). The culture of mosquito larvae free from living organisms. Amer. J. Hyg. 
22, 18-25. 
TRAGER, W. (19353). On the nutritional requirements of mosquito larvae (Agdes aegypti). 
Amer. J. Hyg. 22, 475-93. 
TRAGER, W. (1936). The utilisation of solutes by mosquito larvae. BioZ. Bull. 71, 343-52. 
TRAGER, W. (1937). A growth factor required for mosquito larvae. J. Exp. BioZ. 14, 240-51. 
UVAROV, B. P. (1928). Insect nutrition and metabolism. A summary of the literature. Trans. Ent. 
Sot. London. 76, 255-343. 
WEYER, F. (1934). Der Einfluss der Larvalernahrung auf die Fortpflanzungsphysiologie ver- 
schiedener Stechmticken. Arch. Schi$s.- u. Tropenhyg. 38, 394-S. 
(h) THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). See under section (a-f). 
BATES, M. (1949). The Natural History of Mosquitoes. Macmillan Co., New York. 
BLISS, A. R. JR. and GILL, J. M. (1933). The effects of freezing on the larvae of Aedes aegypti. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 13, 583-8. 
BLUNK, H. (1923). Die Entwicklung der Dytiscus marginalis L. vom Ei bis zur Imago. 2. wiss. 
zooz. 121, 171-391. 
BODENHEIMER, F. S. (1924). Ueber die Voraussage der Generationzahl von Insekten. II. Die 
Temperatur-Entwicklungskurve bei medizinisch wichtigen Insekten. ZbZ. Bakt. (Abt. I, 
Orig.) 93, 474-80. 
BRUES, C. T. (1939). Studies on the fauna of some thermal springs in the Dutch East Indies. 
Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts Sci. 73, 71-95. 
DE MEILLON, B. (1934). Observations on Anopheles funestus and Anopheles gambiae in the 
Transvaal. PubZ. S. Afr. Inst. Med. Res. no. 32, 195-248. 
GUTZEVICH, A. V. (193 1). The reproduction and development of the yellow fever mosquito under 
experimental conditions. Mug. Parasit. Leningrad, 2, 35-54. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 
21, 2. 
GUTZEVICH, A. V. (1932). The graphic representation of certain data in the biology of mosquitoes. 
Mug. Parasit. Leningrad, 3, 5-16. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 23, 46. 
HEADLEE, T. J. (1940). The relative effects on insect metabolism of temperature derived from 
constant and variable sources. J. Econ. Ent. 33, 361-4. 
HEADLEE, T. J. (1941). Further studies of the relative effects in insect metabolism of temperatures 
derived from constant and variable sources. J. Econ. Ent. 34, 171-4. 
HEADLEE, T. J. (1942). A continuation of the studies on the relative effects on insect metabolism 
of temperatures derived from constant and variable sources. J. Econ. Ent. 35, 785-6. 
HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB. See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
HUFFAKER, C. B. (1944). The temperature relations of the immature stages of the malarial 
mosquito, etc. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 37, l-27. 
JANISCH, E. (1925). Uber die Temperaturabhangigkeit biologischer Vorgange und ihre kurven- 
massige Analyse. Pjhig. Arch. Ges. Physiol. 209, 414-36. 
JANISCH, E. (1932). The influence of temperature on the life history of insects. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. 
Lond. 80, 137-68. 
273 CH 
THE LARVA AND ITS ENVIRONMENT 
LUDWIG, D. (1928). The effect of temperature on the development of an insect (Popillia japonica 
Newman). Physiol. 2001. 1, 358-89. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1920). Heat and Stegomyia fasciata: short exposures to raised temperatures. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 14, 73-82. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1915). See under section (g). 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). See references in ch. I (f), p. 18. 
MARTINI, E. (1923). Theoretisches zur Bestimmung der Lebensdauer von Schadlingen, etc. 
Z. angew. Ent. 9, 133-46. 
MUIRHEAD THOMSON, R. C. (1940). Studies on the behaviour of Anopheles minimus. Part III. 
Thermal death point. J. Malar. Inst. India, 3, 323-48. 
PEAIRS, L. M. (1914). The relation of temperature to insect development. J. Econ. Ent. 7, 174-81. 
RAMSAY, G. C. and CARPENTER, J. A. (1932). An investigation on petroleum oils for malaria 
control purposes (freezing). Rec. Malar. Surv. India, 3, 203-18. 
TROFIMOV, G. K. (1942). Experiments on cold resistance of the larva of Anopheles pulcherrimus 
and A. bifurcatus. Msg. Parasit. Moscow, 11, 79-81. 
UVAROV, B. P. (1931). Insects and climate. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 79, l-247. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. P. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Methuen and Co., London. 
Ed. 2 (and subsequent editions). 
WRIGHT, M. G. (1901). The resistance of the larvae of mosquitoes to cold. Notes on the habits 
and life history of mosquitoes in Aberdeenshire. Brit. Med. J. 1, 882. 
WRIGHT, W. R. (1923). On the effects of exposure to raised temperatures upon the larvae of 
certain British mosquitoes. Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 91-4. 
(i) EFFECT OF STARVATION AND OVERCROWDING 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). See under section (a-f). 
DE MEILLON, B., GOLBERG, L. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. (1945). See under section (g). 
WEIDLING, K. (1928). Die Beeinflussung von Eirijhrenzahl und -g&se einiger Dipteren durch 
Hunger im Larvenstadium, etc. 2. angew. Ent. 14, 69-85. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The storage of protein, fat, glycogen and uric acid in the fat-body 
and other tissues of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. BioZ. 19, 56-77. 
(j) EFFECT OF SALT, pH, SOAP AND CHEMICALS 
BALFOUR, A. (1921). Mosquito breeding in saline waters. Bull. Ent. Res. 12, 27-34. 
BARBER, M. A. (1944). A measurement of the toxicity to mosquito larvae of the vapours of 
certain larvicides. PubZ. HZth Rep. Wash. 59, 1275-8. 
BRINK, C. J. H. and CHOWDHURY, D. K. D. (1939). Ammonium sulphate as a combined ferti- 
liser and mosquito larvicide. J. Malar. Inst. India, 2, 111-12. 
BUCHMANN, W. (193 1). Untersuchungen tiber die Bedeutung der Wasserstoffionenkonzentration 
fur die Entwicklung der Mtickenlarven. 2. Angew. Ent. 18, 404-16. 
CHOPRA, R. N., ROY, D. N. and GHOSH, S. M. (1940). Insecticidal and larvicidal action of 
Tephrosia vogelii. J. ikfalar. Inst. India, 3, 185-9. 
FREEBORN, S. B. and ALSATT, R. F. (1918). The effect of petroleum oils on mosquito larvae. 
J. Econ. Em. 11,299-307. 
FROBISHER, M. JR. and SHANNON, R. C. (1931). The effects of certain poisons upon mosquito 
larvae. Amer. J. Hyg. 13, 614-22. 
GIBBINS, E. G. (1932). A note on the relative size of the anal gills of mosquito larvae breeding 
in salt and fresh water. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 26, 551-4. 
HACKER, H. P. (1925). How oil kills Anopheline larvae. F.M.S. Malar. Bur. Rep. 3. 
IMPERIAL INSTITUTE (1940). A Survey of Insecticide Materials of Vegetable Origin. Imperial 
Institute, London. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1955). The Ai;des mosquitoes of the Sudan. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 164-73. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1914). A note on the action of common salt on the larvae of Stegomyiafasciata. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 4, 339-44. 
274 
REFERENCES 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1916). Chlorine as a larvicide. Rep. Accra Lab. for 1915, p. 71. Abstract 
in Rev. Appl. Ent. 5, 47. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1922). The effect of saline solutions and seawater on Stegomyia fasciata. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 15, 377-80. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1923). A note on the action of lithium chloride on mosquito larvae. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 17, 9-l 1. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1921). The influence of hydrogen-ion concentration in the development of 
mosquito larvae. Parasitology, 13, 348-5 1. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1926). Some effects of electric current on mosquito development. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 16, 315-17. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1929). The significance of the pH in the development of mosquito larvae. 
Parasitology, 12, 132-57. 
MARTINI, E. (1922). Ober den Einfluss der Wasserzusammensetzung auf die Kiemenlange bei 
den Mtickenlarven. Arch. Schifi.- u. Tropenhyg. 26, 82. 
MATJXESON, R. and HINMAN, E. H. (1928). See under section (g). 
MOORE, W. and GRAHAM, S. A. (1918). A study of the toxicity of kerosene. J. Econ. Ent. 11,70-5. 
MUIR, F. (1920). A convenient mosquito poison. Hawaiian Planter’s Record. Abstract in Rev. 
Appl. Ent. 9, 38. 
MURRAY, D. R. P. (1936). Mineral oil in mosquito larvicides. Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 289-305. 
PAGAST, F. (1936). Uber Bau und Funktion der Analpapillen bei Agdes aegypti L. (fasciatus 
Fabr.). Zool. Jahrb., Zool. 56, 184-218. 
PANTAZIS, G. (1935). Les effets de la salinite de l’eau sur les larves des culicines. Prakt. Acad. 
Athens, 10, 348-56. 
RUDOLFS, W. and LACKEY, J. B. (1929). The composition of water and mosquito breeding. Amer. 
J. Hyg. 9, 160-80. 
RUSSELL, P. F. and RAO, T. R. (1941). See under section (a-f). 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1928). Algae and the food of Anopheline larvae. Ind. J. Med. Res. 15, 
969-88. 
SHANNON, R. C. and FROBISHER, JR. M. (1931). A comparison of the effect of various substances 
upon larvae of Ai;des aegypti. Amer. J. Hyg. 14, 426-32. 
STRICKLAND, C. (1929). Soap as a mosquito larvicide. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 22, 
509-10. 
TANIMURA SEIZO and SONOJI HINE (1952). An experimental study on the function of dilute 
solutions of strong inorganic acids upon larval mosquitoes, etc. Shikoku Acta Med. 3, 36-40. 
WATSON, G. (1937). Some observations on mosquito larvae dying in anti-malarial oils and other 
substances. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 31, 417-26. 
WATSON, G. (1941). See under section (a--. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1930). A theory of tracheal respiration in insects. Proc. R. Sot. London B, 
106,229-50. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933 a). The effect of salts on the anal gills of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. 
Biol. 10, 1-15. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933 b). The function of the anal gills of the mosquito larva. J. Exp. Biol. 
10, 16-26. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933 c). The adaptation of mosquito larvae to salt water. J. Exp. Biol. 10, 
27-37. 
WILLIAMSON, K. B. (1924). The uses of gases and vapours for killing mosquitoes breeding in 
wells. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 17, 485-519. 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1942). A comparison of factors affecting the development of three species of 
mosquitoes, etc. Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 67, 95-7. 
WORSLEY, R. R. LE G. (1934). The insecticidal properties of some East African plants. Ann. Appl. 
Biol. 21, 649-69. 
YATES, W. W. (1946). Time required for AL;des vexans and A. lateralis larvae to obtain a lethal 
dose of several larvicides. J. Econ. Ent. 39, 468-71. 
275 18-2 
XII 
GR.OWTH 
(a) GENERAL FEATURES OF LARVAL GROWTH 
Certain ‘laws’ or generalisations regarding the growth of insects have been put forward. 
Dyar’s rule (Dyar, 1890) was based on the fact that measurement of the head capsule of 
caterpillars increases in geometrical progression at each moult by a ratio (usually 1.4) 
which is constant for a given species. Other authors have found a similar relation in other 
groups. Przibram’s rule, based on measurements of Sphodromantis, is that at each instar 
every cell divides once and grows to its original size giving an increase therefore in weight 
or volume at each instar of twice. Linear increase will therefore be at the rate of the cube 
root of two, that is 1.27. Though the hypothetical explanation of the rule as first given is 
not of general application, an increase of about twice the body weight at ecdysis has been 
shown by Bodenheimer (1933) to occur in many cases. On the contrary, in many cases 
there is no accurate doubling of weight (Wigglesworth, 1942). 
The rate of growth is, however, not always, or even usually, the same for different 
instars. Ripley (1923) notes that increase from the first to the second instar is usually 
greater, and that from the penultimate to the last instar less, than that for other moults. 
Measurements also of particular parts or organs may show harmonious growth, that is, 
in the same ratio as that of the body, or disharmonic, the parts growing at rates peculiar to 
themselves (Huxley, 1932). 
Of authors who have given measurements of growth of the larva of mosquitoes in detail, 
are Kettle (1948), who gives measurements of the length and breadth of the head capsule 
and of certain soft parts in the larva of Anopheles sergenti, and Abdel Malek and Goulding 
(1948), who have studied the rate of growth of two sclerotised parts, namely, the head 
capsule and siphon, in four species of mosquito including ALides aegypti. The first-men- 
tioned authors note that measurements of the length and breadth of the head capsule 
obeyed Dyar’s law with a ratio of l-524. Abdel Malek and Goulding found measurements 
of the width of the head capsule and length of the siphon for the different instars in p to 
be respectively 246,402,635, 854 and 23 1, 388, 601, 756 giving respectively ratios of 1.63, 
1.58, 1.34 and l-68, l-55, 1.27, results which are almost identical with results of the present 
author (see Tables 14 and 15). 
A very full and detailed account of tissue growth in relation to metamorphosis in 
AL;des aegypti, including growth measurements, is given by Trager (1937). Measurements 
of larval growth in this species are also given by Gander (195 1) and for Anopheles by 
Jones (1953). 
CONDITIONS AFFECTING GROWTH 
In the life cycle of Agdes aegypti growth as manifested by general increase in size and weight 
only occurs in the larval stage, no food being taken in during the egg or pupal stage and no 
appreciable growth in size or weight taking place. And though the imago may take in food 
276 
GENERAL FEATURES 
and develop eggs no increase due to growth in the ordinary accepted sense occurs. It is 
through observations on the larval stage therefore that the rate of growth for the species 
as manifested by overall increase in weight has mainly to be ascertained. 
Influences chiefly affecting growth are: (1) temperature, and (2) nutrition. 
Under optimal food and other conditions the times taken for the larval stage of A. aegypti 
as a whole and for each instar have been found to be very constant for any given tempera- 
ture. The optimal temperature appears to be round about 28” C. Above this there is some 
slight increase in rate of development, but with some decrease in size. From 28” to about 
25” there is a gradual lengthening of the period. Below 25” there is a very great and 
increasing lengthening which reaches the limit of complete cessation of growth at about 
10” C. There is, however, no corresponding decrease in size of insect unil below about 
18” C. when the period of growth is already extremely prolonged. 
The effect of deficient food, up to a certain limit, appears chiefly as a decrease in total 
growth with little effect on the time taken for development so that it is chiefly evidenced by 
a smaller size of the adults. Such an effect applies not only to the amount (and suitability) 
of food present in the medium, but upon that actually taken, since this may be restricted 
due to interference with feeding by overcrowding, restlessness from exposure to light and 
other disturbing influences. There may also possibly be intrinsic factors in the insect itself 
which retard or hasten development. 
With starvation conditions, however, deprivation of food has a profound effect in 
lengthening the period of development and decreasing total growth as indicated in the 
mature larva and the resulting pupa and adult. This may amount to an almost indefinite 
prolongation of the larval stage, subject only to viability, with reduction in size and weight 
to half the normal or less (see under ‘Starvation’, p. 266). 
Interest in growth, however, chiefly relates to the laws concerning normal growth and 
particularly on the rate of growth as shown in different stages of growth and in different 
parts of the body. In these respects certain considerations would seem to be worth referring 
to. 
In the first place, certain parts of the larva are soft and others hard and sclerotised, 
conditions of growth clearly differing in the two cases. Usually it is the sclerotised parts 
that are selected for measurement since these alter little if at all during the course of a 
particular instar, growth being, so to speak, hidden until at ecdysis the contained soft 
parts are liberated again to become fixed and sclerotised for the period of the new instar. 
This is not so in the case of the soft parts where growth is continuous. Here absence of any 
fixed point in the course of the instar at which measurements are to be made introduces a 
difficulty. Thus Abdel Malek and Goulding say, speaking of such difficulty, ‘Determination 
of the nature of the rate of growth during successive moults cannot be accurately assayed 
without an accurate determination of the time spent by each larva in each stadium.’ 
METHOD OF INVESTIGATION 
In the data here given an attempt has been made to determine growth rate in both soft and 
hard parts, and the relation of these to each other, in linear and weight measurements by 
(1) utilising as fixed points in development the stage immediately preceding and immedi- 
ately following upon ecdysis, and (2) observations made at different hours on the culture 
as a whole. From such procedure as (1) the growth that has taken place can be determined 
277 
LARVAL GROWTH 
accurately during each instar, that is from post-ecdysis when the instar begins to pre- 
ecdysis when it ends, and from (2) as will be shown later, very interesting information 
regarding growth in culture can be ascertained. 
In relation to these data a point should be stressed that growth (as occurring in a larva 
or parts of its body) is essentially one of increase in volume or weight, these being equiva- 
lent where there is no change in shape or density. Linear measurement can be regarded as 
a linear expression of this. The importance of this will be clear later. 
For observations at post- and pre-ecdysis samples of larvae from a culture at times when 
the different ecdyses are immanent have been kept under observation and larvae seen to 
be about to undergo change, or seen to have just completed the change, used for the 
required measuffements. Observations given in the tables will show that linear and weight 
measurements in A. aegypti at the two times (post- and pre-ecdysis, or, to be more precise, 
to use the terms ‘immediate’ and ‘ pre-ecdysis ‘) show that ratios of linear measurements 
and weight are almost identical for the soft parts. Thus for a soft part the ratio for growth 
during an instar is given by that of the measurement at pre-ecdysis to that at irnmediate. 
For a hard part it is that given by the immediate measurement of an instar to the post- 
ecdysis measurement of the preceding instar. Or in the last case with but little modification 
of that for any instar to that for the preceding instar, since in the sclerotised parts there is 
in most cases but little change once the parts have hardened. 
For the second type of observation, that is the following-up of growth in culture, 
standard cultures as described by me elsewhere (Christophers, 1947) have been used. 
Samples have been taken at intervals by pipetting out in bulk (see p. 115) a mass of larvae, 
all of which, or a suitable proportion of which, have been measured or weighed. In all 
cases cultures used for such a purpose have been started with eggs that have hatched out 
within 15 or in some cases at as short an interval as 5 minutes. The results show: (1) the 
growth curve for the culture as a whole; (2) the degree of spread in the case of each instar, 
for though the larvae in a culture may start even, each successive instar becomes more and 
more spread out in time, the growth curve for the culture as a whole being a composite 
one formed of the overlapping frequencies of successive instars; (3) information regarding 
time passed in successive instars and much information about various other aspects of 
growth as will be apparent from succeeding sections and the tabular statements and figures. 
(b) LINEAR MEASUREMENTS OF INSTARS AT 
PRE- AND POST-ECDYSIS 
In Table 14 are given the mean values found in different instar stages for linear measure- 
ments of body length and for such parts as seemed suitable for measurement. In Table 15 
are the factors of increase shown by these figures for each instar period or ecdysis as the 
case may be. 
Under the heading ‘ soft parts’ are those parts not enclosed in hard cuticle, including 
‘body length’ which is mainly of this nature. It will be seen, comparing pre-ecdysis 
measurements with those for post-ecdysis, that there is no significant increase, and often a 
slight decrease, at the time of ecdysis. For this reason factors of increase at ecdysis for soft 
parts have not been entered in the table of ratios. 
Under the heading ‘hard parts ’ are those parts like the head that cannot expand except 
278 
LINEAR MEASUREMENTS 
at ecdysis. In this case little or no change takes place during the instar period, and for 
reasons given above factors of increase for the instar period have not been given. 
A third heading relates to ‘special cases’. These are parts that behave not altogether as 
hard or soft parts or have characters that require special consideration. They will be 
discussed later. 
Table 14. Means of measurements of instars in millimetres at 
post- and pre-ecdysis stages 
Instar IV 
Soft parts 
Body length 
Thorax length 
Thorax width 
Abdomen length 
Abdomen width* f L. \ 
Instar I Instar II Instar III Pre- 
I A 1-b I * \ 
Eclosion Pre- Post- Pre- Post- Pre- Post- Male Female 
1.01 1.97 1.97 3.27 3.13 5.06 4.85 6.17 7.33 
0.137 0.305 0.283 0.503 0.51 o-92 0.83 0.88 1.41 
0.216 0.410 0.437 0.714 0.76 1.23 1.22 1.67 1.83 
060 1.40 1.36 2.24 2.03 3.52 3.28 4.10 5.14 
0.147 0.260 0*280 0.47 1 0.46 0.76 0.75 0.99 1.24 
Hard parts 
Head length? 
Head width? 
Antenna length? (0.23) 0.255 0.420 0.41 0.56 0.65 0.82 - - 
(0.18) 0,278 0.463 0.46 0.71 0.74 O-98 - - 
(0.08) 0,108 0.169 0.162 0.237 0.245 0.348 - - 
Special cases 
Siphon length 
Siphon width 
Anal papillae 0.128 0.280 0,287 0.448 0.44 0.67 0.75 0.80 0.94 
0.08 0.149 0.167 0.268 0.276 0.392 040 0.41 0.45 
0.119 0.212 0.263 0.335 0.49 0.60 0.79 0.84 1.00 
* Width of third abdominal segment. 
t The data relate to before and after ecdysis. The first column (in brackets) gives the measurements at hatching 
before the head is expanded. They are not considered in relation to growth. 
Table 15. Growth rates calculated from data given in Table 14. 
Instar periods 1. \ 
IV 
Soft parts 
Body length 
Thorax length 
Thorax width 
Abdomen length 
Abdomen width 
Mean rate I II III 
1.95 1.66 1.62 
2.23 1.78 1.80 
1.90 1.63 1.62 
2.33 1.65 1.73 
1.77 1.68 1.65 
2.03 1.68 1.68 I A \ 
Male Female 
1.27 1.51 
1.06 1.70 
1.37 1.50 
1.25 1.57 
1.32 1.65 
1.25 1.59 
Hard parts* 
Head length 
Head width 
Antenna length 
Mean rate 1.65 1.37 1.26 - - 
1.69 1.54 1.32 - - 
1.57 1.46 1.42 - - 
1.63 1.46 1.33 - - 
Special cases 
Siphon length 
Siphon width 
Anal papillae? 2.20 1.61 1.48 1.07 1.25 
1.86 1.61 1.42 1.02 1.12 
2.21 1.86 1.61 1.06 1.27 
* Change at ecdysis at end of instar. 
‘f Including rate for instar and at ecdysis. 
279 
LARVAL GROWTH 
BODY LENGTH 
Though the total body length consists of both ‘hard’ (head capsule) and ‘soft’ parts 
(thorax and abdomen) it is a desirable measurement to have and in the main it is a soft 
part. Since the respiratory siphon and the anal segment are set at an angle to the rest of 
the body they do not form a very suitable end-point for measurement and ‘body length’ 
has been taken as that from the tip of the head (preclypeus) to the point where the siphon 
begins on the eighth segment dorsally. In this measurement particularly the greatest care 
was taken to maintain the natural state of the body. After a number of trials the best 
results were obtained when a number of larvae were very gently chloroformed on a glass 
sheet covered with wet blotting paper, larvae which had died in a straight position being 
selected for measurement. 
As with other measurements those of total body length show a graded decreasing growth 
ratio reaching a low figure in the fourth instar, especially in the male. The larva increases 
from a length of 1.0 mm. on emerging from the egg to a mean of 7.33 mm. for the female, 
or an increase factor of 7.33. The male increases only some six times, which, however, is 
very considerable seeing that the male pupa is only about half the weight of the female 
pupa. With each instar the growth factor steadily decreases from approximately 2.0 in the 
first instar to 1.25 in the male and 15 in the female. At ecdysis there is little change, 
usually a slight reduction. 
THORAX AND ABDOMEN 
The thorax and abdomen taken together form the greater part of the body length and 
represent growth as a soft part without the complication of the head capsule. This measure- 
ment increases during the larval period in the female from O-737 mm. to 6.55 mm. or 
8-9 times. In width the abdomen increases 8.4 and the thorax 8.5 times. The body as a 
whole, therefore, so far as the soft parts are concerned, maintains very closely its original 
form. As in all other measurements those for the thorax and for the abdomen show a 
steadily diminishing increase factor as growth proceeds. 
THE HEAD CAPSULE 
Apart from some slight increase which may precede ecdysis, the dimensions of the head 
capsule remain unchanged throughout the instars, increase being seen only at ecdysis. The 
mean diameter at hatching, allowing 2 hours for expansion at this time, and at the respec- 
tive ecdyses was in the female O-278, O-463, 0.71 and 0.98 giving increase factors of 1.67, 
1.54 and l-32. The factors of increase for length are a little lower, being respectively 1.65, 
l-37 and 1.26, corresponding to the fact that the shape of the head broadens slightly with 
growth. 
THE ANTENNA 
The antenna is interesting since the larval antenna takes no part in the final imaginal 
structure, the imaginal buds of the antennae being entirely within the head capsule. Further 
the length of the larval antenna would seem to be correlated with the working of the mouth 
parts forming part of an outer circle of sensory or protective hairs in advance of these parts. 
Being a hard part increase in size is entirely confined to the change at ecdysis. The growth 
factors are 1.57, 1.46 and 1.42. 
280 
LINEAR MEASUREMENTS 
THE RESPIRATORY SIPHON 
The siphon in the fourth instar is a typical ‘hard’ structure, since so far as growth is con- 
cerned it is a completely closed chitinous box. In the earlier instars, however, it behaves 
like a ‘soft’ structure, since the chitinised portion is pushed up like a cap by the growing 
hypodermal siphon of the succeeding instar. It has about the same growth indices in the 
first three instars as the soft parts, though somewhat less in the third instar and, for reasons 
given, very little increase in the fourth instar. 
THE ANAL PAPILLAE 
These increase in size both during the instar and at ecdysis, as shown in the tables. To 
obtain the total growth in this case the two rates (for instar period and at ecdysis) must not 
be added but multiplied. The total growth is about the same as that for the soft parts. 
Table 16. Weight of instars at post- and pre-ecdysis 
Instar 
First 
First 
First 
First 
Second 
Second 
Third 
Third 
Fourth 
PuPa Stage 
0 hours 
2 hours 
4 hours 
Pre-ecdysis 
Post-ecdysis 
Pre-ecdysis 
Post-ecdysis 
Pre-ecdysis 
Post-ecdysis 
Pre-ecdysis 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female Number 
of 
weighings 
- 
3 
5 
5 
4 Number Weight 
weighed (mg.) 
1067 14.6 
2201 46.5 
908 20.9 
35 2.8 
29 2.4 
59 23.5 
11 4.2 
34 61.0 
26 42.4 
- - 
5 16.0 
36 176.0 
873 2275.1 
822 3906.5 Weight Ratio Ratio 
per larva increase in increase at 
(mg.1 instar ecdysis 
o-0137 - - 
0.0211 - - 
0.0230 - - 
0.0800 5.8 - 
0.083 - 1.03 
0.398 4.8 - 
0.382 - 0.96 
1.794 4.7 - 
1.615 - 0.90 
- - - 
3.200 1.98 - 
4.900 3.07 - 
2.606 0.81 
4.752 1 0.97 
GENERAL 
The above indicates growth ratios for the earlier instars approaching, and in the first instar 
reaching, doubling of the dimensions. The ratio of increase further shows a definite 
decrease in successive instars, especially so in the fourth instar. Not only is the ratio in the 
fourth instar reduced, but whilst the first three instars last each approximately 24 hours, 
the fourth instar is nearly three times as long. The measurements therefore are in accord 
with the findings of Ripley (1923), that increase from first to second instar is usually 
greater and that for the penultimate to the last instar less than for other instars. 
(c) WEIGHT OF INSTARS AT PRE- AND POST-ECDYSIS 
In Table 16 are given the results of weighing larvae at pre- and post-ecdysis stages. It will 
be seen that increase in weight is entirely that gained during the period of instar growth. At 
ecdysis there is no increase in weight and there may even be a decrease. This is shown not 
only by weighing larvae before and after, but by the fact as shown later that the weight of 
massed larvae in a culture at times of ecdysis is little influenced by the proportion of instars 
present, showing that at such times the two instars in the culture do not differ appreciably 
in weight. 
281 
LARVAL GROWTH 
Increase in weight of successive instars, as with linear measurements, shows a decreased 
ratio as development proceeds, the ratios for the four instars being respectively, 5.8, 4.8, 
4.7 and 3.07. The last figure refers to the female. In the male the increase for the fourth 
instar is only 1.98. The mean weight of the larva increases as a whole from O-0137 mg. at 
hatching to 4.90 mg. in the female just prior to pupation, an increase of 358 times. 
The ecdyses occur at approximately 24, 48, and 72 hours and pupation at 144 hours in 
the case of the female. Pupation in the male is about 24 hours earlier. If the weights of 
the instars are compared with the graph given in Fig. 24 (p. 284) for the curve of growth 
in a culture it will be seen that the instar weight does not differ appreciably from the 
weight for the culture, in spite of the fact that all larvae do not pass through their stages of 
development simultaneously. 
Table 17. Cubes of linear increase ratios for body length for instars 
and observed weight ratios for these instars. 
Linear increase 
Cube of linear 
increase 
Observed weight 
increase Instar I 
l-95 
7.4 
5.8 Instar II Instar III 
1.66 1.62 
4.6 4.3 
4.8 4.7 Instar IV 
I h \ 
Male Female 
1.27 l-51 
2-o 3.4 
2.0 3-o 4.3 4.6 234 358 Mean 
.A 
I \ 
Male Female 
1.62 l-68 
4.6 4.9 Total A f \ 
Male Female 
6.1 7.3 
226 389 
COMPARISON OF LINEAR AND WEIGHT MEASUREMENTS 
Since linear increase, other things being equal, would be represented by the cube of this in 
measurement made in volume, and, if no change in density occurred, in weight, it is of 
interest to see how far such a relation applies to the data obtained. In Table 17 are given 
the cubes of the ratios for linear increase in body length for each instar and in contrast the 
ratios obtained for weight increase (for source of data see Tables 15 and 16). It is obvious 
that such a relationship does hold good. 
(d) MEASUREMENT OF GROWTH IN CULTURES 
The course of development of Aedes aegypti in cultures has already been indicated. Owing 
to the ‘spread’ caused by unequal rate of growth of individual larvae it is never possible, 
except in the very early stages, to find all larvae at the same stage of development. Even if 
only one instar is considered, the individual larvae are still in different stages of growth in 
that instar. It is necessary, therefore, in following up development in a culture, to obtain 
more information than is given by measurement of post- and pre-ecdysis stages. 
The cultures made use of for this purpose have all been of considerable size, that is some 
hundreds or more, bred at 28” C. under conditions that experience had shown to be 
optimal and from hatchings that have taken place in a short interval of time, 15 minutes or 
less. Though it may be thought that such conditions are unduly artificial, this is not so to 
the extent that might at first sight appear. Under conditions in nature or in the laboratory 
favourable to the life of the insect, eggs laid by a single female almost entirely hatch over 
a very brief range of time and the cultures now considered do not differ to any marked 
degree in general characters from those put up in the course of ordinary routine work. 
Moreover, origin from simultaneous hatching was an essential requirement to avoid what 
282 
WEIGHT 
might otherwise have been larvae starting development at different unknown times. In all, 
twenty-six cultures of this kind have been followed up during a period of about ten 
months. 
As in the previous section, where measurement was concerned with particular stages in 
larval development, both linear measurements and weight have been taken, but in this case 
in relation to hours of culture. The method adopted has been to take samples at stated 
times by pipetting out indiscriminately a suitable mass of larvae, filtering these off after 
a preliminary wash, removing a suitable portion of the mass so yielded for measurement or 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
20 t --+ Pupation begins 
I I I I I I I I I 1 I I 
24 48 72 96 120 144 
Hours of culture 
Figure 23. Chart giving graph for measurements of body length in culture at 28” C. 
Observed values are shown as dots. In the body of the chart a line is drawn through these, giving 
the graph for linear increase. The dots for each instar are linked up alternately by unbroken and 
by broken lines. 
At the top of the chart are given the percentages of the different instars at hours corresponding 
to those of the growth curve. 
weight and at once killing the remainder by dropping into water at 80” C. for determination 
of the percentage of instars. This last procedure was necessary since near ecdysis time con- 
siderable change in the percentage may take place in a short time from ecdysis, especially 
in the earlier stages where this takes but a short time and goes on even among massed 
larvae. For linear measurements larvae have been treated as in the previous section. The 
sample for weighing was allowed to rest as a mass on a porous tile, which rapidly freed it 
from extraneous water. Care was always taken to avoid damaging the larvae by undue 
pressure or manipulation, since damage to the anal papillae causing these to be detached 
results in loss of haemolymph. 
283 
LARVAL GROWTH 
The data for body length and corresponding counts of instars are too voluminous for 
publication, but are shown in graph form for the cultures as a whole in Fig. 23, with the 
graphs for count of instars set along the top of the figure. It is very clear that growth as 
indicated by linear measurement plotted against time gives a straight line up to about 
96 hours. After 96 hours there is some falling off in the rate. There are, however, by this 
time a number of complicating factors which would have to be allowed for before con- 
cluding that a reduction in growth rate is responsible. In the first place it is now that 
differentiation of sex begins to be apparent and as male larvae do not grow as large as the 
I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I 1 
24 48 72 96 24 
Hours of culture 
Figure 24. Graph of increase in body weight. 48 
Giving graph for observed measurements of body weight during culture. Observed weights are 
shown as dots and what appears to be the course of increase as shown by the observations is 
indicated by the interrupted line. Plottings from the formula given in the text are shown by 
crosses. For data see Table 17 and text. 
Inset. The first 48 hours shown on an increased vertical scale. 
female this would be a cause of reduced body length in the culture as a whole. Also it is 
now that pupation is beginning and, as male pupae are considerably smaller than the 
female, this would remove more of the smaller male larvae than of the larger female and 
have a reverse effect. Towards the end of the culture period another effect is at work, 
namely that the relative number of larvae showing delayed development increases. These 
would be too few at an earlier period to have any appreciable effect. But as pupation 
removes more and more of the total larvae any retarded and usually poorly developed 
individuals begin to have an undue effect. In regard to linear measurement there seems no 
doubt that growth in a culture where larvae are started, so to speak, at scratch gives 
against time a straight line graph. 
The result of weighing samples of larvae at different hours of culture is given in Table 18. 
Plotted, these data give the curve shown in Fig. 24. In the early stages, up to about 50 hours, 
that is about the end of the second instar, the form of the curve suggests an exponential 
284 
WEIGHT 
function (see inset to graph). Later the curve is more uncertain, but may still be of this 
character. Such deductions as can be made regarding the nature of the growth curve will 
be considered in the next subsection. 
Table 18. Weight of larva at d@erent hours of culture 
Hour 
0 
18 
23 
24 
25 
26 
28 
44 
45 
46 
48 
51 Number of 
larvae 
weighed Weight 
(mg.) 
- - 
1026 66.3 
208 1 175.6 
2728 238.2 
88 10.4 
2900 336.5 
2468 368.7 
903 374.6 
181 97.7 
493 ‘257.6 
1087 594.1 
61-l 0.58 Mean 
weight 
per 
larva 
0.0137 
0.065 
0.089 
0.090 
0.118 
0.119 
0.146 
0.414 
0.54 
O-52 
0.55 Hour 
53 
54 
69 
70 
71 
76 
95 
115 
117 
119 
144 Number of 
larvae 
weighed 
326 
35 
146 
219 
345 
178 
25 
209 
153 
183 
6 
8 44.8 Weight 
(mg.) 
223.7 
25.7 
249.4 
384.6 
517.3 
367.7 
74.0 
751.1 
590.6 
755.7 
20.7 Mean 
weight 
per 
larva 
0.69 
0.73 
1.71 
1.76 
1.50 
2.07 
2.96 
3.59 
3.86 
4.13 
3.90 
(male pupae) 
5.60 
(female pupae) 
(e) CHARACTERS OF THE GROWTH CURVE 
The data that have been given show clearly that linear increase plotted against time gives 
a straight line. This at first sight seems to contradict what has been said as to the reduced 
ratio for instars as development proceeds. Actually the two facts are mutually explanatory. 
That the graph for linear increase is a straight line indicates that increase is not exponential, 
that is, proportional to the increase in size, but is a fixed increment added throughout. 
Imagine now a larva 1 mm. in length which increases in length per unit time by a fixed 
increment of 1 mm. The ratio of increase would then work out as 2/l = 2, 3/2 = 1.5, 
4/3 = 1.33, . . . . giving a reduced ratio, although the increase has been a regular one. The 
larva, however, is not a Euclidian line, but a solid body, and in such a case, provided the 
body maintains its shape, linear increase is only an indication of a three-dimensional 
increase, that is of one that would be represented by the cube of the linear increase and 
would be exponential. Furthermore, the reverse would hold good. If a mass is to grow 
evenly throughout, its increase must be exponential and if this were so then linear increase 
would be by even increments. 
Consider, as a conveniently shaped mass, a sphere with a radius R which is increasing 
in size by a steady increment to the radius of r. Its volume, and equally its weight if its 
consistence remains unaltered, will increase according to the formula 
1/37r(R + rt)3, 
where 1/3n is a constant characteristic of the sphere and could be given as a constant k. 
The body of the larva is not a sphere, but it is of very constant shape at least in the 
earlier instars and it would be reasonable to think of a constant k that might characterise 
this in a similar formula. It might be reasonable therefore to consider a formula 
W = k(L + It)“, 
285 
LARVAL GROWTH 
where W is weight, L the original length of the larva, 2 the increment, t time in hours and 
k a constant. Knowing that L at hatching is 1-O mm. and that from the straight line graph 
given by body length the increment 2 can be found to be approximately O-054, the formula 
could be written 
W= k( 1 + 0.054ty. 
Taking k as the proportion of weight to length of the larva at hatching, that is O-0137, 
a formula was given the results from which are indicated in Fig. 24 by crosses. Though far 
from a perfect fit, it seems worth recording as a rational formula though it still does not 
give the essential factor of growth, utilising the value O-054 as observed but without pro- 
ceeding further in mathematical analysis. 
Table 19. Observed and calculated measurements of instars 
Time Body length (mm.) Weight (mg.) 
in I B v 
hours Obs. Calc. Obs. Calc. 
Instar I at hatching - 1.01 - 0.0137 - 
Instar I at pre-ecdysis 24 1.97 2.26 0.08 0.164 
Instar II at pre-ecdysis 48 3.27 3.59 040 0.63 
Instar III at pre-ecdysis 72 5.06 5.88 1.79 1.56 
Instar IV at pre-ecdysis (male) 96 6.17 6.50 3.20 3.20 
Instar IV at pre-ecdysis (female) 120 7.33 7.48 4.90 4.18 
In Table 19 is given the application of the formula to the instar values for body length 
and weight as determined at pre-ecdysis, that is as distinct from determinations on the 
cultures as a whole. 
All observations relate to growth at 28” C. determined as described in the early portion 
of the chapter. 
REFERENCES 
ABDEL MALEK, A. and GOULDING, R. L. (1948). A study of the rate of growth of two sclerotised 
regions within the larvae of four species of mosquitoes. Ohio J. Sci. 48, 119-28. 
BODENHEIMER, F. S. (1933). The progressive factor in insect growth. Quart. J. Biol. 8, 92-5. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb. 45, 176-231. 
DYAR, H. G. (1890). The number of moults of lepidopterous larvae. Psyche, 5, 420-2. 
GANDER, R. (195 1). Experimentalle und oekologische Untersuchungen tiber das Schhipfvermogen 
der larven von Aedes aegypti L. Rev. Suisse Zool. 58, 215-78. 
HUXLEY, J. S. (1932). Problems of Relative Growth. Methuen and Co., London. 
JONES, J. C. (1953). Some biometrical constants for Anopheles quadrimaculatus Say larvae in 
relation to age within stadia. Mosquito News, 13, 243-7. 
KETTLE, D. S. (1948). The growth of Anopheles sergenti Theobald (Diptera: Culicidae) with 
special reference to the growth of the anal papillae in varying salinities. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 42, 5-29. 
PRZIBRAM, H. and MEGUSAR, F. (1912). Wachstumsmessungen an Sphodromantis bioculata Burm. 
I. Lange und Masse. Arch. Entw. Mech. 34,680-741. 
RIPLEY, L. B. (1923). The external morphology and post embryology of noctuid larvae. Illinois 
Biol. Monogr. 8, no. 4, l-103. 
TEISSIER, G. (1936). (Dyar’s law.) Livre Jubilaire E. L. Bouvier, pp. 33442. 
TRAGER, W. (1937). Cell size in relation to the growth and metamorphosis of the mosquito 
Aedes aegypti. J. Exp. Zool. 76, 467-89. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Methuen and Co., London. 
Ed. 2 (and subsequent editions). 
286 
XIII 
THE LARVA: 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
(a) THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
The alimentary canal of Culex larva has been very fully described by Thompson (1905) 
and that of Anopheles larva by Imms (1907). * 
Passing backwards, the canal consists of preoral cavity, mouth, pharynx, oesophagus, 
proventriculus, mid-gut or ventriculus with its diverticula or gastric caeca and intestine, this 
last consisting of a thin-walled portion or ileum, a short thick-walled colon and a terminal 
portion, the rectum. The portion of mid-gut associated with the proventriculus is sometimes 
termed the cardia. In addition there are the larval salivary glands and the Malpighian 
tubules. The relations of these parts to each other and to the body are shown in 
Fig. 25 (1). 
The pharynx, oesophagus and proventriculus (in part), collectively forming thefire-gut, 
are developed from the stomodaeum, the intestine constituting the hind-gut, as also 
seemingly in the mosquito the Malpighian tubules, from the proctodaeum, whilst the mid- 
gut and the gastric caeca are derived from the mesenteron. In keeping with this the 
pharynx and oesophagus, as also the intestine and rectum, have a chitinous intima and 
their epithelium is usually more or less of the flattened type. An exception, however, is the 
colon which has very large cells. The epithelium of the mid-gut and its caeca, on the 
contrary, consists of very large and massive cells. The cells of the Malpighian tubules 
are also very large, not unlike those of the mid-gut and colon. 
THE PREORAL CAVITY AND MOUTH (Figs. 25, 26) 
The preoral cavity is the functional mouth. Its roof is formed by the largely membranous 
structures on the ventral aspect of the labral and clypeal regions, including the epipharynx 
and especially the large membranous post-epipharyngeal lobe (Fig. 26 (3) epl). Its floor is 
formed mainly by the dorsal surface of the mandibles and to some extent of the maxillae. 
When these appendages are abducted, the floor is largely open. As shown by Christophers 
and Puri (1929), the emerging current produced by the brushes in the culicine larva when 
feeding is directed backwards from such opening thereby causing the larva to glide along 
in its characteristic way. When the brushes are retracted for combing or protection they 
are received in a compacted form into the preoral cavity and lie largely covered by the 
* See also Raschke (1887, A2de.s nemorosus), Hurst (1890, Culex), Nuttail and Shipley (1901, Anopheles), 
Metalnikoff (1902), Wesche (1910), Schonichen (1921), Martini (1929), de Boissezon (1930), and various text-books 
on medical entomology. For special description of the pharynx see Kulagin (1905) and Salem (193 1) and for 
description of the mid-gut Federici (1922, Anopheles) and Samtleben (1929). There are also many references to 
structure in the works of Wigglesworth, notably the very full description of the proventriculus of Culex, Aedes 
and Anopheles larva (Wigglesworth, 1930) and the paper dealing with storage of fats, glycogen, etc. (Wigglesworth, 
1942). 
287 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
mandibles and maxillae. For a small extent in the middle line the floor is formed by the 
labial and hypopharyngeal rudiments and the sharp-toothed mental sclerite (Fig. 25 (2)). 
Any true buccal cavity, if present, is very restricted in extent. Snodgrass (1935, p. 387) 
defines the buccal cavity as ‘The first part of the stomodaeum, lying just within the mouth; 
mx 2 
I 05 mm. I I 
Figure 25. The alimentary canal. 
1 Lateral view of larva showing general anatomy of the alimentary canal. 
2 Anterior view of head showing preoral cavity and surrounding structures. 
3 Pharynx and related parts. Dorsal view. 
Lettering : an, antenna; bs, black spot area; Co, colon; Cs, gastric caeca; ct, the crescent; 
fb’, flabellar plate ; fb”, scallop ; fg, frontal ganglion; fn, frontal connective ; g. 1, supra-oesophageal 
ganglion; g. 2, sub-oesophageal ganglion ; IL, ileum; Zp, process of lateral plate of clypeus; 
Mg, mid-gut; MO, mouth; Mt’, Malpighian tubule (dorsal); Aft”, Malpighian tubule (dorso- 
lateral) ; Aft”, Malpighian tubule (ventro-lateral) ; md, mandible ; md’, membrane covering 
fenestra; mx, maxilla; mxp, maxillary palp; Oe, oesophagus; P, pharynx; Pv, proventriculus; 
p, palatum; ppl, post-palatal lobe; Rc, rectum; sg, salivary gland; ss, suspensorium; ss”, position 
of lateral oral apodeme; t. 10, ventral cephalic trachea; 12, 12’, anterior elevators of roof of 
pharynx; 13, median elevators of roof of pharynx; 14, lateral elevators of roof of pharynx; 
15, posterior decussating muscles ; 16, dorsal suspensors of the pharynx; 22, dorsal compressors 
of the pharynx; 24, lateral compressors of the pharynx. 
its dilator muscles arising on the clypeus, and inserted before the frontal ganglion and its 
connectives ‘. In Ai;des aegypti the frontal ganglion lies on the roof of the pharynx a little 
behind the level of the chitinisation described later as the crescent, and at about the same level 
on each side of the pharynx is a slight constriction where the frontal ganglion connectives 
pass up to the ganglion. Into the roof of the pharynx anterior to this are inserted two small 
288 
THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
muscles, 12 and 12’ (Fig. 25 (3)), taking origin from the falciform apodeme in a position 
that might well be clypeus. It would appear, therefore, that in this case the buccal cavity is 
the front portion of the pharynx. It will be simpler, however, to include such portion in 
the pharynx of which in this case it obviously forms a part. 
THE PHARYNX (Fig.26) 
This has been described in some detail by Thompson in Culex and by Imms in Anopheles, 
but curiously enough the remarkable fringes are not referred to as such by either author. 
In sections these are quite inconspicuous and have been figured and considered merely as 
hairs. They are much more conspicuous in, for example, the cast skin of the larva, where 
their real nature as an important functional feature of the organ is obvious. It would seem 
that it is upon the fringes that the ability of the larva to filter out minute particles from the 
water depends. Further, it is probable that the necessity for such fringes has been the reason 
for the large pharynx and in turn for the rather large head of the mosquito larva, especially 
in some species which live in open clean water. Apart from the fringes it is difficult to see 
how the pharynx could filter particles from the current produced by the brushes. It is 
doubtful if the brushes themselves act to any extent as a filtering agency in the culicine 
mosquito, their main function being the production of a current directed into the pharynx. 
The general appearance and structure of the pharynx, as also its relation to surrounding 
parts, can be best seen from the figures. Essentially it is a funnel-shaped muscular organ 
capped by a flat roof the lateral halves of which are capable of being folded up face to face 
in the middle line, thereby closing up and flattening the organ. The lateral edges of this roof 
form sharp longitudinal ridges referred to as crests of the pharynx. In life these crests are 
in constant in-and-out movement, expanding the organ when feeding is in progress, con- 
I tracting it in the act of swallowing the bolus of food that gradually collects. Ventrally the 
pharynx opens by a broad slit-like mouth into the preoral cavity, this being, on the analogy 
already given, situated between the roof and the edge of the funnel in its most anterior and 
ventral part. The lateral limits of the opening are indicated by peculiar narrow curved 
chitinisations curiously like fish-hooks (ss”), especially in the Culex larva, which may 
be termed the lateral oral apodemes. In the middle line dorsally and ventrally just inside 
the opening of the mouth are the plates later described respectively as the crescent and 
ovalplate. Though slit-like at rest the mouth by the lifting of its roof can be widely dilated. 
When the mouth and pharynx are so dilated they form, with the preoral cavity, a deep 
cavernous opening occupying much of the head space (Fig. 26 (1)f). Into this opening is 
directed the current produced by the feeding brushes. 
Where the pharynx ends posteriorly it forms a dorsal backward projection of the organ 
reaching almost to the dorsum of the head. This posterior angle of the pharynx, as will be 
seen, has important relations with the opening of the aorta and with the sympathetic 
nerve system. 
The pharyngeal roof consists of several plates which, taken together, form a roughly oval 
plaque. Anteriorly in the middle line is the small dark crescentic crescent (ct). Behind this 
the median portion of the roof is formed by the laterally symmetrical semilunar plates, the 
dorsalplates (dp). External to these and forming the lateral edges of the roof on each side 
are rather indefinite thickenings, the lateral plates (Zpp). These are diffusely thickened 
towards their anterior ends and also posteriorly. The anterior thickenings receive the 
I9 289 CH 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
attachment of the lateral oral apodemes, narrow strips of sclerotisation which link the 
pharynx to the suspensoria and probably give support to it (Figs. 25 (2); 26 (3), (4), ss”). 
The posterior thickenings receive the insertions of the largest of the extrinsic muscles of 
the pharynx, the lateral dilators (no. 14 of head muscles), which help to sling the pharynx 
in its position in the head and to dilate it by drawing open the crests. It is the two posterior 
thickenings which, narrowing behind, come together and largely form the posterior angle 
of the pharynx, constituting a notch through which pass the aorta and the recurrent 
pharyngeal nerve from the frontal ganglion. Inserted into the posterior angle and its 
neighbourhood are various muscles as described later coming from the dorsum of the head. 
Whilst these and the lateral dilators sling the pharynx in the head, the organ receives 
support below from the lateral oral apodemes. In their natural position these lie more or 
less vertically springing from about the middle of the suspensoria. Though they have been 
termed and have the appearance of apodemes, they are largely surface thickenings of the 
membrane at the mouth angles. 
Between the dorsal and the lateral plates of each side are the dorsal fringes (pf’). These 
consist of narrow ribbons of thickening crossed by fine transverse ridges which are con- 
tinued beyond the ribbon’s edge as stiff straight filaments, the whole forming a structure 
very like a small-toothed comb. The actual number of fringes in the series is not easy to be 
sure of, but there are at least three on each side, the outer ribbon carrying one, whilst the 
inner ribbon carries at least two, one arising from each edge. The filaments, excluding the 
ridge portion of the ribbon, are about 50,~ in length and 0.7,~ in width, the space between 
being very regularly only about 1.0,~ or one-fifth of the diameter of a red blood corpuscle. 
Terminally some of the filaments end in fine straight branches, though the majority seem 
simple, continuing in strictly parallel course to their termination. In Culex molestus the 
branching is more marked. In sections food masses are frequently seen lying in the pharynx 
in close connection with the fringes. In the dilated pharynx they project as ridges along the 
roof of the cavity. As noted later a further fringe series lies along the ventral floor on 
either side. 
On the floor of the pharynx anteriorly and at about the level of the crescent is an oval 
plate, oval plate (op), which forms a kind of threshold to the cavity. Behind this are a 
number of fine, backwardly directed hairs. This portion of the floor often appears in sections 
somewhat sunk to form a gutter and the hairs standing erect look as if they might be 
functioning as a valve, allowing entry to a current, but opposing its exit. The ventralfringes 
Figure 26. Pharynx. 
1 Sagittal section of head showing preoral cavity and pharynx. 
2 Dorsal view of head showing pharyngeal connections. 
3 Roof of pharynx and preoral cavity (cast skin preparation). 
4 Floor of pharynx and hypopharynx (cast skin preparation). 
5 Portion of a pharyngeal fringe highly magnified. 
6 Basal portion of a flabellar hair at same magnification as 5. 
Lettering : ap, flabellar apodeme; ct, the crescent; dp, dorsal plate of pharynx; ep, epipharynx; 
epl, post-epipharyngeal lobe; f, pharynx; f”, fringes ; hp, hypopharynx; L.r, labial rudiment ; 
Zpp, lateral plate of pharynx; ms, mental sclerite; op, oval plate; pe, post-epipharyngeal bar; 
pf ‘, pharyngeal fringes (dorsal) ; pf “, pharyngeal fringes (ventral) ; ppl, post-palatal lobe; 
4, elevators of the pharynx (two muscles); 17, accessory dorsal suspensors of the pharynx. 
For other lettering and numbers see under explanation of Fig. 25. 
I 05mm. I I 
1 05mm. I 2 
,OO1mm.l 5 6 
Figure 26 
291 19-2 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
lying along the sides of the pharynx below the lateral plates here converge. Medianly, 
strictly speaking, there is no floor since ventrally the cavity of the pharynx forms a funnel- 
shaped passage leading to the oesophagus. 
Histologically the pharynx has an inner lining of chitinous intima with small-celled 
pavement epithelium and an outer muscular coat. Apart from the small discreet dorsal 
compressor muscles (no. 22 of the head muscles) the dorsal roof has no muscular coat. 
The ventral portion has an inner coat of circular muscle with a strong band lying external 
to this beneath each crest laterally, termed by Thompson the cingulum. Though taking 
origin and insertion only from the pharynx this muscle has much the character of an extrinsic 
bundle (see Fig. 30 (1) m. 21). The muscular coat proper much resembles that of the 
oesophagus with an inner circular coat and some loosely arranged external longitudinal 
fibres. The extrinsic muscles of the pharynx and the nerve connections are dealt with later. 
THE OESOPHAGUS 
This is a short tube passing from the pharynx through the nerve ring to end in the pro- 
ventriculus. It consists of an inner lining of flattened epithelium with chitinous intima, 
usually much thrown into folds, and an outer coat of circular muscle. Towards the base 
of the neck the muscular coat makes connection by strands of tissue with surrounding 
structures including the aorta which runs closely along its dorsal surface. As noted by 
Salem it has a ventral and a dorsal bulge in this position. Actually these effects are due to 
the oesophagus here passing through the cervical muscular diaphragm, which will be 
described later when the rather complicated parts in this region are dealt with. 
THE PROVENTRICULUS (Fig.27(1)) 
The proventriculus has been described by Thompson in Culex, by Imms in Anopheles and 
in the three representative species Anophelesplumbeus, Culexpipiens and Alfdes aegypti, as 
also in a number of other Diptera and orders of insects, by Wigglesworth (1931 b). In all 
three forms it is roughly similar and consists essentially of an intussusception of the end of 
the oesophagus into the cardia of the mid-gut. Its structure in AL;des aegypti will be 
evident from the figure showing it in longitudinal section. Its walls consist of three layers, 
namely an inner, or direct, face and an outer, or reflected, face of the intussuscepted 
oesophagus closely surrounded by a layer formed by the cardia (c). At the lower end of 
the intussusception is a conspicuous annular blood sinus. The cells of the outer wall formed 
from the cardia are large and resemble in type those of the mid-gut, though evidently 
specialised, being more columnar and deep staining. Where at the bend the small cells of 
the oesophageal type give place to the large cardia cells there is what Thompson describes 
as a ‘ break’, a small gap where there appear to be no cells. At this point too there is a 
ligament-like extension of the connective tissue coat of the oesophagus on to the cardia. 
The lower end of the oesophageal intussusception differs somewhat in detail in the 
different mosquitoes. In Anopheles there is a strongly developed chitinous ring carrying 
fine curved spines and a special ring of longitudinal muscle above this not present in other 
forms (Wigglesworth, 1930). In Culexpipiens there is a general chitinous thickening of the 
reflected layer with an everted rim at the edge. In AZdes aegypti the chitinous margin of 
the free edge is still more thickened (Fig. 27 (1) a). 
In regard to the function of the organ it has been shown by Wigglesworth that not only 
292 
THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
does the layer of cardia cells secrete the peritrophic membrane but that the structure acts 
as a press, moulding the secretion as it passes out (see also under digestion in the chapter on 
physiology of the larva). The peritrophic membrane, as shown by Wigglesworth (1930), is 
composed of chitin, though the outer layer of secreting cells appears almost certainly a part 
a 
6 
C- 
Figure 27. Proventriculus, gastric caeca and mid-gut. 
Longitudinal section of proventriculus. 
Section through anterior end of mid-gut and gastric caeca. 
Transverse section of anterior portion of mid-gut of early fourth instar larva. 
Transverse section of posterior portion of same. 
Tangential section of mid-gut wall showing early infiltration of small basal cells. 
Tangential section of extreme outer layer of mid-gut wall in a pre-ecdysis fourth instar larva, 
showing heavy infiltration with small basal cells and early formation of muscle fibres of future 
adult mid-gut. 
Lettering: 1, a, annular chitinous thickening acting as moulding press; b, blood sinus; 
c, annular muscle; d, epithelium of cardia; e, ring of regenerative epithelium. 2-6, a, basement 
membrane; b, basal cell; c, developing muscle fibres ; d, extrusion from cell; e, tracheal cell. 
Other lettering : C’s, gastric caecus ; Mg, mid-gut ; Oe, oesophagus ; pm, peritrophic membrane ; 
Pv, proventriculus. 
of the mid-gut and of mesenteral origin. The cells not only have a close resemblance to 
those of the mid-gut, but show the same inner clear margin or even a striated border. 
External to this border may often be seen a considerable thickness of clear substance, 
presumably secretion which will eventually become peritrophic membrane. Around the 
293 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
upper margin where the oesophageal cellular lining changes to the large cells of the cardia 
is a ring of epithelium which as Thompson notes forms a regenerative area in the pupal 
stage. 
THE SALIVARY GLANDS AND THEIR DUCTS (Figs.25(1); 39(3)sg) 
On either side of the proventriculus and abutting upon the lower lateral caecum of its side 
are the larval salivary glands. Unlike the Chironomus larva, which in many species uses the 
salivary secretion to bind together particles to form a protective tube, the glands of the 
mosquito larva have no such special function to serve and are relatively very small. Each 
gland consists of a single tubular acinus having an open lumen surrounded by large deeply 
staining granular cells. The distal end of the acinus is usually somewhat dilated, sometimes 
considerably so, forming a spherical cyst-like portion which as noted by Thompson in the 
living larva is highly refractile. In sections very little indication is given of secretion in the 
lumen. 
From each gland there passes forwards a delicate thin-walled duct, salivary duct. Each 
duct on the ventral aspect of the nerve connectives in the neck joins with its fellow of the 
opposite side a little behind the sub-oesophageal ganglion to form the common salivary 
duct. The common duct passes forwards along the dorsal surface of the labial rudiment to 
open by a transverse slit just dorsal to the labial plate (Fig. 13 (6)). The site of the opening 
figured by Salem as at the ventral part of the plate and immediately behind the mental 
sclerite is incorrect. None of the ducts is provided with taenidia as in the adult. 
THE MID-GUT OR VENTRICULUS (Fig.27(2-6)) 
Immediately beyond the proventriculus is the portion of mid-gut from which arise the 
balloon-like diverticula or gastric caeca. These occupy a large part of the space of the 
thorax. They are eight in number arranged around the canal, two dorsal, two ventral and 
two lateral on each side. They all bulge somewhat forward, but to a greater extent back- 
wards, the largest and longest being the lateral, which reach to the beginning of the 
abdomen, then the dorsal, the smallest being the ventral. They are lined with cells re- 
sembling those of the mid-gut, but of rather larger area. They have a broad striated border 
and like the cells of the mid-gut have rather pale clear cytoplasm staining strongly with 
eosin. There appears to be no muscular coat or indication of muscle fibres. 
Beyond the origin of the caeca the mid-gut extends back as a long uniformly cylindrical 
organ to the fifth abdominal segment, the exact position to which it reaches being a little 
variable. Within it lies the long column of food debris enclosed in the tube of peritrophic 
membrane, a space being everywhere present between the membrane and the cells lining 
the gut. 
The histology of the mid-gut wall is somewhat complicated by the changes which take 
place in the fourth instar leading to the condition present in the pupa. Essentially in the 
younger stages the gut is lined by uniform large cells with large globular nuclei and clear or 
finely granular cytoplasm. In vertical section the cells tend to appear cubical or rectangular 
and of more or less even depth. Cut tangentially they appear as large polygonal cells. 
Those of the anterior two-thirds or so of the gut are flatter and of more regular shape than 
those in the posterior portion where individually they project more freely into the lumen, 
especially in the later stages of development. There is a well-marked striated border which 
is thicker and more conspicuous posteriorly. This is of the ‘brush’ form, consisting of a 
294 
THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
palisade-like arrangement of separate filaments which in dissections may sometimes be 
seen sprayed out around fragments of cytoplasm like a coating of motionless cilia. In the 
advanced larva the gut cells, especially in the hinder portion of the gut, loose their regular 
form, show vacuoles and project far into the lumen which eventually becomes crowded by 
droplets and extruded masses of cellular material, a preliminary to the casting off of the 
whole old epithelial layer in the pupal stage. 
In addition to the large cells there are a variable number of small darkly staining cells 
situated about the bases of the larger cells. These increase greatly in number towards the 
later stages forming lines or clusters of small cells along the lines of division of the larger 
cells (Fig. 27 (5)). These are regeneration cells which eventually in the pupa develop into the 
imaginal epithelium. The exact nature and source of the small basal cells are not clear. 
Whilst some are destined to form the imaginal epithelium, others appear to be forerunners 
of the imaginal muscular coat of the gut. There are also cells which appear to be of the 
nature of the normal replacement type. These may be of all sizes up to that approaching 
the normal cells. Whilst proliferation of the basal cells is very striking towards the end of 
the fourth instar a somewhat similar though less marked increase is present at the end of the 
thirdinstar, suggestingthat there is somedegree of replacement of the gut epitheliumat ecdysis. 
Externally there is a well-marked basement membrane and the presence of numerous 
tracheal cells with their tracheole branches. How far there is a muscular coat seems some- 
what doubtful. Thompson states that scattered muscle fibres are visible in sections. 
Samtleben (1929) notes that muscle in this case is inconsiderable and figures a section of the 
gut of the first instar larva of Ak;des aegypti with scattered small longitudinal muscle fibres. 
A curious feature is the presence in the fourth instar of two parallel strands passing along 
the whole length of the mid-gut on its mid-ventral surface and a similar pair dorsally. These 
bands have occasional nuclei and appear to be muscular in nature. Apart from these I have 
been unable in the early instar to detect definite muscle fibres. Later, however, there 
appears associated with abundant basal cells a regular network of fibres at right angles as 
in the adult mid-gut (Fig. 27 (6)). This would seem to be a prepupal development and if a 
muscular coat exists in the mid-gut apart from this it is of a very inconspicuous character. 
At its termination, the mid-gut with its large-celled epithelium gives place abruptly to the 
thin-walled ileum. 
THE ILEUM (Figs. 25 (1); 28 (l-3 IL) 
In marked contrast to the inert tubular mid-gut is the thin-walled muscular and actively 
contracting ileum. At its anterior end the ileum is somewhat dilated in a funnel-shaped 
manner, forming as in the adult a pyloric ampulla into which open at its upper end the 
five Malpighian tubules. Though anatomically the ampulla may be considered as part of 
the ileum, it shows some independent structural features. As noted by Thompson there is, 
for some distance beyond the termination of the mid-gut, a complete absence of the 
muscular coat of the ileum, which ends abruptly at a little distance from the mid-gut, 
bridged only by the delicate basement membrane and the thinned-out epithelium of the gut. 
The epithelium here too shows special characters, there being for a short distance beyond 
the mid-gut a zone of small rather cubical cells in contrast to both the large mid-gut 
epithelium and the much-flattened epithelium of the ileum (Fig. 28 (1)). 
The remainder of the ileum consists of a length of thin-walled gut extending from the 
pyloric ampulla in the fifth or sixth segment to its termination in the colon in the seventh 
295 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
segment. In life it is usually seen exhibiting active vermicular movements. In fixed material 
it may appear as a thin-walled dilated tube of even diameter, or as a narrow portion of the 
gut with its walls thrown into folds. In the latter case it may be empty of any food column. 
The ileum has a lining of flattened epithelium with a thin cuticular lining and doubtful 
striated border. External to this is a thick outer coat of circular muscle. This consists of a 
single layer of regularly disposed muscle fibres with round nuclei in contrast with the oval 
nuclei of the epithelium (Fig. 28 (2), (3)). There do not appear to be any longitudinal fibres. 
In the seventh segment the ileum enters the colon, usually with a slight valvular-like pro- 
trusion of its walls into that organ. 
THE COLON (Fig. 28 (4), (5)) 
The colon is a curiously thickened and seemingly rigid portion of the gut. It is thrown into 
longitudinal folds and lined by large cells not unlike those of the mid-gut or even of the 
Malpighian tubules. There is a thick well-marked striated border. Spaced along its outer 
wall at short intervals are circular muscle fibres linked up by membrane. In fresh prepara- 
tions these spaced fibres, by constricting the organ, give it a curious beaded annulated 
appearance. It seems doubtful if there are any longitudinal fibres and none could be demon- 
strated by Thompson. Probably staining by Heidenhein’s method might show such fibres 
where otherwise they have been missed. Towards the end of the eighth segment the colon 
gives place with no very clear line of demarcation to the rectum. It would be interesting to 
know what function is served by this peculiar portion of the gut. It is just possible that it 
may be concerned with breaking up of the tube of peritrophic membrane, which in the 
faeces of the larva is passed in short, rather regular lengths. See under ‘Digestion’, p. 704. 
THE RECTUM (Fig. 28 (7), (8)) 
This is again a relatively thin-walled structure with its lining thrown into longitudinal folds. 
In histological structure it is not unlike the ileum with rather small-celled flattened epi- 
Figure 28. Intestine, colon and rectum. 
Section through junction of mid-gut and ileum, showing entrance of Malpighian tubules, gap 
in muscular wall and ring of cells at pylorus. 
Longitudinal section of ileum in dilated condition showing regular arrangement of circular 
muscle fibres. 
A, transverse section of contracted ileum on same scale as the mid-gut and colon in 1 and 4. 
B, portion of wall of same more highly magnified. c, showing muscular and flat epithelial 
layer and characteristic nuclei. 
Longitudinal section through full length of the colon. 
Transverse section of colon. 
Section through junction of ileum and colon. 
Continuation of colon into rectum showing continuation of the circular muscle fibres of the 
former into the latter. 
Transverse section of rectum with diaphragm formed by tracheae and muscles of anal 
segment. 
Lettering: a, entry of Malpighian tubule into pyloric ampulla; b, circular muscle fibres; 
b’, nuclei of same; c, gap following abrupt termination of muscular coat of ileum; d, ring of 
special cells; e, longitudinal muscular bundles of anal segment ; IL, ileum; Mg, mid-gut ; tv, 
tracheal vessel. 
296 
I I 
O-lmm. 
I I 
, 0.1 mm. , Olmm. 
I I 
, O-lmm. , 
Figure 28 
297 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
thelium and an outer single layer of circular muscle fibres. These fibres continue the series 
of the colon, but with the fibres closer together (Fig. 28 (7)). Like the ileum the lining is 
cuticular without striated border. There do not appear to be any longitudinal fibres 
intrinsic to the organ. Towards its posterior end, however, the rectum receives the insertion 
of some segmental muscles of the anal segment (see under muscular system). In its 
passage through the anal segment the rectum is accompanied on each side by the large 
tracheae passing from the tracheal trunks to the anal papillae and by longitudinal muscles 
of the segment which together form a kind of supporting diaphragm (Fig. 28 (8)). The 
rectum terminates in the anus, which opens at the end of the anal segment between the 
bases of the four anal papillae. The lining at this point is thrown into many longitudinal 
folds. No structures corresponding to the rectal papillae of the adult are present in the larva. 
THE MALPIGHIAN TUBULES 
These are described under the excretory system. They are five in number and open into 
ampulla, one dorsal and the other four arranged dorsally and ventrally at the sides. the 
(b) THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
The tracheal system, besides playing an important part in the life of the insect, undergoes 
interesting changes in the course of the passage from larva, through pupa, to the imago, and 
without some knowledge of its details of structure much that happens in these changes 
cannot well be understood. It is desirable therefore to give a somewhat detailed account. 
The system is best studied in larvae which have been placed, when they have just reached 
the fourth instar, for 5 or 6 days or more in clean water (see under starvation forms). Such 
larvae may be examined alive under a cover-glass suitably supported, or mounted tempo- 
rarily in glycerine or glycerine jelly. For the latter purpose a small opening must always be 
made to allow penetration, or otherwise gross shrinkage and collapse will result. A good 
plan is to place the larva, after puncturing some non-essential part, in 50 per cent glycerine, 
which may advantageously contain a stain, and then transfer to pure glycerine or melted 
glycerine jelly. Very good preparations can be made by killing the starved larvae by the 
formalin method (see under ‘Technique’, p. 116) and leaving them to harden for a day 
or two still floating. After puncture and treatment with 50 per cent glycerine and pure 
glycerine, they can be mounted by dropping melted glycerine jelly on them and covering. 
Air remains in the larger tracheae, which show up vividly, for a surprising length of time, at 
least for days or weeks. For a more permanent and thorough method, that described by 
Wigglesworth in a recent publication can be used (Wigglesworth, 1950). This shows up the 
ultimate fine tracheal branches in a very striking way. 
As in other mosquitoes the larva of A. aegypti is metapneustic, that is the only functional 
spiracles are those opening at the apex of the siphon (post-abdominal spiracles of Keilin, 
1944). 
But though the terminal spiracles of the mosquito larva are the only functional ones, 
other spiracles normal to insects are represented in the A. aegypti larva by tiny black 
sclerotisations in the cuticle from which cords (actually tracheae without a lumen) pass 
inwards representing the spiracular tracheae of insects with open spiracles. The cords have 
been described as early as 1890 by Hurst and by Giles (1902). The small black scleroti- 
sations, which may be termed spiracular puncta, are very clearly seen in the cast skin, as 
298 
THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
also in the cuticle of the pale living larva (Fig. 10 (1) st). They mark very clearly the 
position of the future spiracles in the adult and are present towards the anterior margin of 
abdominal segments I-VII and on the mesothoracic and metathoracic segments just in 
front of the line of hairs indicating these segments. There are no puncta in front of the 
prothoracic dorsal hairs or on the eighth abdominal segment. 
Normally the spiracles of insects are ten in number on each side, two thoracic and eight 
abdominal, namely those on segments I-VIII, the eighth segment being the last segment 
on which spiracles are present in any of the orders. That they are clearly indicated in the 
mosquito larva in normal position towards the anterior end of the first abdominal seg- 
ments, but not on the eighth, gives strong evidence, apart from other considerations 
pointing the same way, that the highly specialised posterior abdominal spiracles of the 
larva (and incidentally of other dipterous larvae so provided) are the spiracles of the 
eighth segment displaced and drawn up behind their proper segment. With change of the 
larva to the pupa these structures, as will be seen later, close up and not only cease to be 
functional, but for all practical purposes disappear, suggesting that their early specialisa- 
tion is the reason why in the Diptera there are only seven abdominal spiracles in the imago 
instead of the usual eight in most other orders of insects. 
The puncta also enable the segmentation of the two spiracles in the thorax to be deter- 
mined with accuracy, for their relation to the thoracic hairs is quite definite. It may be 
noted that, according to Snodgrass (1935), the anterior of the two pairs of thoracic spiracles 
in insects is always mesothoracic, though it may in many cases appear to be prothoracic. 
In the mosquito it has by most authors been considered prothoracic. That it is here also 
mesothoracic is, however, clearly shown, as already noted, in the larva, and as their 
identity is traceable through the pupa to the imaginal stage the homology determined for 
the larva fixes that for the spiracles in the imago. 
THE TRACHEAL TRUNKS 
The most conspicuous feature of the tracheal system are the two large trachea2 trunks 
(Fig. 29 (2)-(4) d) which extend from the terminal spiracles on the siphon through the 
siphon and abdomen to the thorax. In the mosquito larva they are relatively of enormous 
size. Giles (1902), who has given an early description of the tracheal system of the larva, 
suggests that they may serve as a store of air during submergence. A more obvious reason 
is that given by Hurst (1890) that they act as flotation chambers, reducing the specific gravity 
of the larva to that of the water. As has been seen they play an even more precise role in 
the hydrostatic balance of the larva. The trunks form in the abdomen a broad conspicuous 
band on each side of the narrow median space between them occupied by the pulsating 
heart. They are lined with fine taenidia, which, probably due to interference effect, give to 
them under the low power the appearance of watered silk. Especially just before ecdysis 
the trunks may have the appearance of being double-walled, due to the presence of the air- 
filled tracheae of the old instar lying surrounded by the much larger fluid-filled tracheae of 
the oncoming instar. 
Each trunk is constricted to form a bulged portion in the metathorax and in each 
abdominal segment I-VII. Towards the posterior end of each bulge there is a thin line 
crossing the trunk which is free from taenidia and indicates a line of weakness. It is at this 
point that the intima is broken at ecdysis to enable segments of the trunks to be drawn out 
299 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
by traction of the cords attached to the puncta. Anterior to the bulge in the metathorax 
the trunks suddenly narrow and, diverging widely, pass round on either side of the thorax 
to terminate in branches to the head and other parts. At their posterior ends in the eighth 
segment before passing into the siphon there are on the ventral aspect of each trunk a 
number of crypts or depressions from which arises a felt-like mass of tracheoles passing 
to the space behind the terminal chamber of the heart. Lastly, after passing through the 
siphon and just before reaching the terminal spiracles, there is a short specialised portion of 
the trunks forming the felt chamber of Keilin as already described in the section on the 
siphon. 
Across the middle line of the body the trunks are united by a number of commissures. 
One large and important commissure, cervical commissure, is situated just behind the neck. 
A narrow cord-like, but patent, commissure is situated in the thorax (Fig. 29 (2)) and there 
is one in each segment passing ventral to the heart a little anterior to each constriction in 
the abdomen (Fig. 29 (3)). On the outer side of each trunk, at the point where the cords 
from the puncta join the trunks, is a small marked-out area of the trunk wall, insertion 
plaque, from which arise the tracheal branches of the segment. Linking up the branches of 
one segment with those of the segment before and behind are the connectives, usually long 
uniform tracheae taking a wavy course from one tuft of branches to the other. Arising 
from the trunks or its branches, commissures and connectives are tracheal branches 
supplying all parts of the body. 
According to Snodgrass (1935) there is in the generalised insect plan in each segment a 
trachea passing in from the spiracle, spiracular trachea, which sends off a dorsal and a 
ventral branch. Joining up the spiracular tracheae are connecting tracheae which col- 
lectively form a lateral longitudinal trunk. Similarly connectives may join up the dorsal 
branches to form a dorsal longitudinal trunk on each side and there may be also a ventral 
trunk formed by the joining up of the ventral tracheae of successive segments. On this 
plan the tracheal trunks of the mosquito larva are the dorsal trunks, the lateral trunks being 
represented only by the relatively small connectives. 
Landa (1948) has described in great detail the tracheal system in the Ephemerid larva 
and has given a system of nomenclature, numbering and naming the different tracheae. It is 
a curious fact that though the Ephemeridae are a very primitive group and the Diptera far 
removed in zoological position, the characters of the tracheal system are remarkably 
similar in the two, so much so that in regard to the larger vessels and even many of the 
Figure 29. The tracheal system. 
1 Showing tracheation of head. On the left are shown branches of the dorsal cephalic trachea 
only and on the right branches of the ventral cephalic. 
2 Showing tracheation of the thorax. Branches to the dorsal series of imaginal buds (trumpet, 
wing and halter) are shown on the left, those to the ventral buds (fore-, mid- and hind-leg) 
on the right. Similarly dorsal branches are shown on left and ventral on the right as indicated 
by the numbers. 
3 Showing tracheation of an abdominal segment (segments I and II). 
4 Showing tracheal supply to the terminal segments. 
Lettering: a, spiracular puncta; b, site of insertion plaque; c, tracheal ‘knot ‘; d, node line of 
tracheal trunk indicating position where the intima is broken at ecdysis for removal of the 
trunk segments. 
Numbers indicate the tracheal branches as given in the list of tracheae in the text (pp. 304-5). 
3oo 
Figure 29 
301 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
smaller branches the names given by Landa are clearly applicable to those of the mosquito 
larva. Landa does not consider that the tracheal trunks are merely connectives in the 
sense of Snodgrass and regards them, not as ordinary anastomoses, but as quite special 
organs superior to anastomoses and other tracheation. It is easier to describe the condition 
in the mosquito larva on this basis than on the view that the tracheal trunks are enlarged 
connectives, and in the description of tracheal branches here given Landa’s nomenclature 
has been largely followed, though equivalent English names have been used in place of the 
Latin. 
TRACHEAL BRANCHING 
Though the arrangement of branches in the larva, pupa and adult superficially seem very 
dissimilar, fundamentally the basic plan remains throughout and a knowledge of the 
system in the larva will greatly help in describing the changes undergone in the later stages. 
To simplify the description an attached tabular statement gives the names of the chief 
tracheae with numbers which are also used in the figures or when necessary when referring 
to particular branches. This, and what is said below, relates to the fourth instar. It applies, 
however, with little modification to the earlier instars, such differences as occur being indi- 
cated later when the different instars are described. 
The table and figures give branches which may be termed trachea2 vessels, that is those 
furnished with taenidia and ending in trachea2 cells, as contrasted with the ultimate tracheal 
capillaries or tracheoles, which pass in large leashes from the cells to enter the different 
tissues and which can only be satisfactorily demonstrated by special methods, being devoid 
of taenidia and often in part filled with fluid. For their demonstration see Wigglesworth 
(1950) and also earlier papers by the same author (Wigglesworth, 1930, 193 1 a, b, 1938). 
The tracheal cells from which tracheoles normally arise are relatively large, and usually 
stellate, cells seen lying on the surface of muscles and other structures. To a large extent 
they have fixed anatomical positions. As an example those present in the head are shown 
in the figure giving the head tracheation. 
In the arrangement of branches a certain segmental plan is evident, though liable to 
considerable modification in certain parts. It is most clearly shown in tracheation of the 
abdominal segments, but also fairly clearly in tracheation of the thoracic segments. It is 
less evident in the head and some other parts. It will be simplest therefore to describe 
tracheation of the abdomen and to follow this in order by that of the thorax and head 
respectively. 
TRACHEAL SUPPLY OF THE ABDOMEN 
In each segment I-VII is a spiracular trachea, in this case the cord coming from the 
spiracular puncta, which joins the tracheal trunk at an insertion plaque. From this plaque 
there arise, (1) a visceral branch passing forwards and inwards under the tracheal trunk to 
the viscera in the preceding segment, (2) a ventral branch passing outwards and ventrally 
to supply fat-body and other tissues and ending in the ganglion of the segment, (3) a 
connective passing forwards, and (4) a connective passing backwards. The attachment of the 
connectives is a little curious. Each forward connective arises from the visceral branch 
near its origin and runs in a wavy fashion to join the ventral branch of the segment in 
front, usually some little distance from its origin, being then the backward connective of 
that segment. The arrangement will be clear from Fig. 29 (3) in the lower of the two 
abdominal segments shown. 
302 
THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
The above arrangement holds good for all segments of the abdomen, but with some 
modification in segments I and VIII, exclusive that is of any segments posterior to this. In 
segment I the visceral branch is unusually large, passing forwards into the thorax to supply 
the large mass of the gastric caeca. In this case the forward and backward connective 
branches both arise from a short common vessel leading off from the large visceral branch 
(Fig. 29 (3)). In segment VIII the connective from VII has a common insertion with the 
visceral and ventral branch and a long stout branch which passes backwards into the anal 
segment. There is no spiracular cord. The branch passing to the anal segment comes to lie 
lateral to the rectum where it divides into a dorsal and ventral branch supplying the dorsal 
and ventral anal papilla of its side respectively (Fig. 29 (4)). 
In connection with the eighth segment should also be mentioned the rather remarkable 
tracheole plexus already referred to as arising from the tracheal trunks in this position. 
The crypts from which the tracheoles arise are situated on the inner ventral aspect of the 
trunks. They are short tubular depressions with which conspicuous nuclei are associated, 
from which an intricate meshwork of branches passes ventrally to form a dense plexus. This 
is sometimes described as branches passing to the heart. Actually the plexus lies mainly 
posterior to the terminal chamber of the heart occupying a space beneath the base of the 
siphon and above the colon (Fig. 33 (2) b). It forms a mass of tracheoles of somewhat 
reversed pyramidal form limited, if not by membrane, by some form of limiting layer and, 
into the point of the pyramid, are inserted four tiny converging muscles, two on each side, 
an upper and a lower. The upper muscle takes origin from the membrane just below the 
edge of the siphon towards its posterior border and dips downwards and inwards to the 
point of the complex. The lower muscle takes origin from the dorsal knot VIII and passes 
upwards and inwards (Fig. 33 (2) m. 35). The posterior openings of the heart open into the 
space occupied by the tracheoles, which is clearly an important functional accessory organ 
of circulation and as such will be further described when dealing with the heart. 
TRACHEAL SUPPLY OF THE THORAX&. 29(2)) 
The tracheal system of the thoracic segments can best be seen from the figure. Here the 
trunks, after entering the mesothorax, somewhat diverge and become much narrower and, 
though still anchored by cords from the thoracic puncta, these cords are not inserted into 
the trunks directly, but into short branches from these from the ends of which other branches 
also arise, such points being termed by Landa trachea2 knots. It is rather as if in the broad 
thorax and in their narrowed condition the trunks found it awkward to adhere to the 
proper plan and put out a branch to receive the insertion plaque. Otherwise much the 
same plan is seen in the thorax as in the abdomen. There are the visceral branches and 
ventral branches and also connectives. There are also here some small dorsal branches, 
branches which become much more important later in the pupa. The mesothoracic spiracle 
has, however, to cope with the supply both to the prothorax and head. There are also now 
the growing rudiments of the legs, wings and halteres to be supplied. The branches have 
been given in the tabular statement and are shown in Fig. 29 (I), (2). Only some of the 
more important points in the tracheal supply to the thorax need therefore be noted. 
Beyond the level of the mesothoracic spiracle the trunks are continued on either side as 
a large common trunk, the common cephalic (1). This divides into two branches, a dorsal 
cephalic (2) and a somewhat larger ventral cephalic (lo), both passing into the head. The 
303 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
ventral cephalic branch, however, before it enters the head sends off a recurrent branch 
which divides into two, one branch going to the rudiment of the first leg, the other sweeping 
round as the ventral branch of the prothorax to end in the first thoracic ganglion. The 
tracheal supply for the future pupal trumpet comes, however, from the mesothoracic knot. 
Further, the trumpet rudiment has an altogether different relation to the tracheation from 
that of the other rudiments, for the pupal trumpet merely forms around the mesothoracic 
stigrnatic cord and is evidently a product of the hypodermal cells forming part of the 
tracheal system and not a generative bud such as are the rudiments of the legs, wings and 
halteres. These latter receive their tracheal supply, mainly at least, from branches arising 
from the connectives, the importance of which fact becomes more evident in the pupa. 
TRACHEAL SUPPLY OF THE HEAD 
The head (Fig. 29 (1)) receives its tracheal supply from the dorsal and ventral cephalic 
tracheae. Just before entering the head the dorsal cephalic trachea is linked to its fellow of 
the opposite side by a large and important commissure, the cervical commissure. Shortly 
after entering the head it lies in a deep groove in the brain. It supplies especially the brain 
(supra-oesophageal ganglion and optic lobe), the developing compound eye and the 
antenna1 rudiment, ending up in branches to the posterior portions of the large retractor 
muscles of the feeding brushes of its side. The ventral cephalic branch is a larger trachea 
supplying the mouth-parts and related structures. It extends forwards into the labral area 
and supplies also the labial rudiment. For further details see list below. 
LIST OF TRACHEAL BRANCHES 
Mesothoracic spiracle. 
1. Common cephalic. 
2. Dorsal cephalic. 
3. Commissural. Linking with opposite dorsal cephalic. 
4. Lateral, branching into 
5. Branch to adductors of mandible. 
6. Ocular branch to region of eye. 
7. Ganglionic. Supplying brain and optic lobe. 
8. Antennal. Supplying antenna1 rudiment. 
9. Muscular to internal retractor of flabella, 9a, and to external retractor of flabella, 9 b, 
towards origins. 
10. Ventral cephalic. 
11. Prothoracic. In thorax and dividing into 
12. Branch to rudiment of leg I. 
13. Prothoracic ventral. Ending in thoracic ganglion I. 
14. Ganglionic. To sub-oesophageal ganglion. 
15. Muscular. To adductor muscles in occipital region. 
16. Mandibulo-maxillary, branching to supply 
17. Labial rudiment. 
18. Maxilla. 
19. Mandible. 
20. Antennal. To antenna1 prominence. 
21. Labral, with branches to 
22. Internal retractor of flabella near insertion, 22a, and external retractor ditto, 22b. 
23. Labral membrane, flabella, etc. 
24. Common mesothoracic. Leading to tracheal knot and 
25. Mesothoracic spiracular (cord to mesothoracic puncta). 
304 
THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
26. Mesothoracic dorsal, with branch to rudiment of nymphal trumpet (forming around 25), 
and supplying shoulder. 
27. Mesothoracic ventral, ending in thoracic ganglion 2. 
28. Connective, meso- and metathoracic, sending branches to 
29. Rudiment of leg 2 (ventrally). 
30. Wing rudiment (dorsally). Anterior branch, 30a; posterior branch, 30b. 
3 1. Dorsal-lateral, to thorax laterally. 
32. Mesothoracic trunk; narrow portion of trunk linking common cephalic with ballooned 
metathoracic portion of trunk, giving off medianly 
33. Oesophageal branch, directed anteriorly by side of oesophagus, etc. 
34. Commissural, long thin commissure joining 32 towards posterior ends and giving off 
35. Branches to aorta. 
Metathoracic spiracle. 
36. Common metathoracic, linking trunk to tracheal knot, with branches 
37. Visceral; from 36 in its course. 
38. Metathoracic spiracular, cord leading to puncta. 
39. Metathoracic dorsal, to dorsum of thorax. 
40. Metathoracic ventral, ending in thoracic ganglion 3. 
41. Connective, metathoracic-abdomen I, giving off 
42. Branch to halter rudiment (dorsally). 
43. Branch to rudiment of leg 3 (ventrally). 
Abdominal spiracle I. 
44. Spiracular (cord leading to puncta). 
45. Visceral. Large trunk supplying caeca and giving off 
46. Short branch dividing into 41 and 47. 
47. Connective abdomen, segments I-II. Links up posteriorly with visceral branch of 
segment II. 
Abdominal spiracles II to VII. 
48 (II) to 48 (VII). Spiracular cords leading to puncta II-VII. 
49 (II) to 49 (VII). Visceral, turning forwards under trunk and receiving connective from 
segment in front at or near its origin. 
50 (II) to 50 (VII). Ventral, passing directly outwards and ventrally and giving origin shortly 
along its length to 
51 (II) to 51 (VII). Connectives passing from near or at base of visceral branch of anterior 
segment to ventral branch of more posterior segment at some little distance along its 
course. 
52 (II) to 52 (VII). Commissural. Short cordsconnectingthe trunks in each segment medianly 
towards posterior ends of the trunk segments. 
53. Ventral branch to segment VIII. Arising from trunk. 
54. Visceral branch to segment VIII. Arising from trunk. 
55. Anal segment branch. Large trachea on each side arising in common with 53 and 54 
and passing into anal segment where it gives rise to 
56. Branch to eighth segment. 
57. Papillary branch dividing in segment VIII into branches supplying respectively the 
dorsal and ventral anal papilla of its side. 
58. Feltwork of tracheae arising from ventral aspect of the trunks in the eighth segment and 
supplying terminal chamber of the heart. 
(c) THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
The larval musculature, though complicated and consisting of some hundreds of muscular 
bundles, in general arrangement is still broadly based on the general insect plan. The larval 
muscles, in contrast to those of the adult, are mostly narrow bands, many minute and 
20 305 CH 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
thread-like, the only ones that could be described as massive in character being the four 
large muscles operating the feeding brushes and possibly one or two of the larger muscles 
in the thorax. Though all, even those of the visceral coats, are of striated type, the striation 
is usually much less marked than in the adult, and, in contrast also with the adult muscles, 
those of the larva consist of narrow strands of muscular tissue surrounded by very bulky 
sarcolemma (see under ‘ Muscle types ‘, pp. 376-7). The muscular system has not only interest 
as an anatomical feature, but also is important as a help in tracing the homologies of 
skeletal parts. Some reference to it will also be required when dealing with the changes 
occurring during development from the larva through the pupa to the adult. It will be 
convenient to deal first with the muscles of the head and neck and later with those of the 
thorax and abdomen. 
MUSCLES OF THE HEAD 
The muscles of the larval head have been to some extent described by Thompson (1905), 
and later in more detail by Imms (1908). It seems desirable, however, to recapitulate and 
supplement these descriptions and for precision to number the head muscles as has been 
done by Samtleben (1929) for the thorax and abdomen. It would be unwise to attempt, 
however, to relate the many muscles of the complex head structures to any system such as 
that given by Samtleben for the abdominal and thorax muscles, and the twenty-four 
muscles of the head are given numbered consecutively in the following tabular statement 
(see also Fig. 30 (l), (2)). 
Antenna1 TABULAR STATEMENT OF MUSCLES OF THE LARVAL HEAD 
1. Antenna2 muscles. Very small muscles arising from the anterior arm of the tentorium and 
inserted into the membrane at the inner side of the base of the antenna. Much larger in 
Culex pipiens where the antenna is larger and in which the muscle takes origin from the 
posterior arm. 
Clypeal 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. Median retractors of the_flabeZZa. The largest muscles in the head taking origin on each side 
of the middle line of the dorsum of the head and inserted into the head of the stirrup 
apodeme. (Inner retractors of the flabellae of Thompson.) 
Lateral retractors of theflabella. Almost equally large muscles arising laterally towards the 
front of the clypeus internal to the falciform apodeme and inserted into the shaft and point 
of the stirrup apodeme. (Outer retractors of the flabella of Thompson.) 
Elevators of the epipharynx. Small, but long, twin muscles arising from the middle line of 
the dorsum of the clypeus between the origins of muscles 13 and inserted into the middle 
of the post-epipharyngeal bar. (Epipharyngeal muscle of Thompson.) 
Lateral retractors of the post-epipharyngeal Zobe (dorsal Zip of the pharynx). Very small 
muscles arising from the inner ventral aspect of the falciform apodeme and inserted into 
membrane near the middle line posterior to the epipharynx. 
Figure 30. Muscles of the head. 
1 Left side of head viewed from the medial sagittal plane. 
2 Left side of head viewed from dorsal aspect as though the cuticle were transparent. 
Lettering : Br, brain; md, mandible; mx, maxilla ; Oe, oesophagus ; P, pharynx. 
Numbers l-24 are as given in the list of head muscles in the text. 
The effect is that given when muscles are viewed by polarised light. 
306 
23 
144 
8 -- 
6 
Figure 30 I 
20-2 
307 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
Mandibular 
6. Abductors of the mandibles. Muscular bands, 6a and 6 b, arising from the lateral occipital 
region and converging to be inserted into the membrane at the outer angles of the base of 
the mandibles. (Divaricator muscles of the mandibles of Thompson.) 
7. Adductors of the mandibles. Large muscles composed of five bands, 7 a-7 e, arising separately 
from the lateral occipital region and inserted by a single tendon at the inner margin of the 
base of the mandible. (Converger muscles of the mandible of Thompson.) 
Maxillary 
8. Depressors of the maxillae. Twin bands on each side arising from the lateral aspect of the 
head a little behind the ocelli and inserted along with muscle 9 into a projection on the 
dorsal border of the base of the maxilla. (Depressors of the maxillae of Thompson.) 
9. Retractors of the maxillae. Arising from the ventral part of the head capsule at the tentorial 
pit and inserted along with muscle 8 into the base of the maxilla. (Retractors of the 
maxillae of Thompson.) 
Labial 
10. Retractors of the Zabium. Arising on each side along with muscle 9, passing up the side of 
the labial rudiment and inserted into membrane at the base of the pouch on each side of 
the hypopharynx. (Depressor of the labium of Thompson.) 
11. Dilators of the salivary opening. Two minute muscles lying in the hypopharyngeal rudiment 
and inserted into the dorsal surface of the opening of the salivary duct. (Fibres in hypo- 
pharynx of Thompson.) 
Pharyngeal 
12. Anterior elevators of the roof of the pharynx. Two small muscles on each side arising close 
together and along with muscle 5 on the inner ventral surface of the falciform apodeme 
and inserted one behind the other into the roof of the pharynx anterior to the frontal 
ganglion. (Lesser lateral muscles of the pharynx of Thompson.) 
13. Posterior elevators of the roof of the pharynx. Two small muscles arising on each side of, 
and close to, muscle 4 in the median line of the clypeus and passing backwards to be 
inserted one behind the other in the median line of the roof of the pharynx behind the 
frontal ganglion and the small dorsal compressors of the pharynx. (Elevators of the dorsal 
plate of the pharynx of Thompson; elevator muscles of Imms.) 
14. Lateralpharyngeal. Two moderately large muscles arising on each side just external to the 
origins of the lateral retractors of the flabellae and at the inner side of the falciform 
apodeme near the antenna1 base and inserted into the lateral plates of the pharynx at their 
chief convexity. (Lateral muscles of the pharynx of Thompson; lateral pharyngeal muscles 
of Imms.) 
15. Decussating muscles of the pharynx. A small muscle on each side arising from the dorsum 
of the head just behind the origins of the median flabellar muscles, decussating and in- 
serted into the lateral plate of the opposite side towards its posterior end. (Diagonal 
muscles of Thompson and of Imms.) 
16. Dorsal retractors of the pharynx. A small muscle arising on each side of the middle line 
behind muscle 15 and inserted into the posterior angles of the pharynx. (Retractors of the 
pharynx of Thompson; retractor pharyngeals of Imms.) 
17. Accessory dorsal retractors of the pharynx. Very small muscles arising behind muscle 16 
and passing in front of the frontal ganglion to be inserted at the posterior angles of the 
pharynx a little behind and ventral to muscle 16. (Anterior dilators of the oesophagus of 
Thompson.) 
18. Ventral retractors of the pharynx. Long thin strands arising from the inner ends of the 
posterior arms of the tentorium and passing external to the cerebral connectives to be 
inserted into the ventral lip of the pharynx anterior to the oval plate. (Ventral retractors of 
the pharynx of Thompson.) 
308 
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
19. Dorsal compressors of the pharynx. Four small intrinsic muscles of the pharynx passing 
from side to side across the middle line of the roof of the pharynx in the region of the 
frontal ganglion. The two most posterior muscles decussate and blend. (Dorsal muscles 
of the pharynx of Thompson and of Imms.) 
20. Frontal ganglion muscle. A curious thin and thread-like, but long, muscle which arches 
over the pharynx accompanying the connectives of the frontal ganglion. 
21. The cingulum. Thick muscle bundles situated along the sides of the pharynx just below the 
crests. They take origin on each side from the posterior angle of the pharynx and are 
inserted anteriorly at the sides of the lower lip of the pharynx. (Cingulum or girdle muscle 
of Thompson.) 
Oesophageal. * 
22. Dorsal dilators of the oesophagus. Small muscles arising dorsally on each side of the 
cervical collar and passing behind the cerebral connectives to be inserted into the wall of 
the oesophagus dorsally. (Dorsal, or sometimes given as posterior, dilators of the oeso- 
phagus of Thompson.) 
23. Lateral dilators of the oesophagus. A row of muscular bands taking origin from the cervical 
collar ventrally on each side and passing up through the nerve ring at the sides of the 
oesophagus to be inserted in a line caudal of the cingulum. (Lateral dilators of the 
oesophagus of Thompson; lateral dilators of Imms.) 
24. Tentorial dilators of the oesophagus. Muscles on each side taking much the same course as 
muscles 23, but taking origin from the inner end of the posterior arm of the tentorium. 
The largest muscles of the larval head are the retractors of the feeding brushes. These are 
not inserted directly into the brushes or even into the main apodemes, but into the stirrups, 
which are separate apodemes and only indirectly linked to the main apodemes. The action 
of these muscles in retracting the brushes is easy to understand as they can be seen to draw 
down and compress together the whole of the labral structures (Fig. 34 m.2, m. 3). This 
does not explain, however, how these muscles bring about the sweeping movements of these 
organs. Thompson notes that during the sweeping (flickering) movement of the brushes 
these muscles remain tense but still. Yet it seems certain that they must be concerned, since 
there are no other muscles that can be adequate for such a purpose and their great size 
would be explained if they were required for this, the one most vital action of the larva, 
namely the action necessary to obtain its food. The next largest muscles are the adductors 
of the mandibles, each arising by five rather widely separated heads, which along with other 
gnathal muscles in the occipital region all converge to the mandible and maxilla of their 
side (Fig. 30 (2) m. 7). 
A surprisingly large proportion of the head muscles relate to the pharynx, which is an 
extremely mobile organ and one by which again the larva mainly obtains its food, since it 
functions as the filtering apparatus of the currents brought by the brushes. Its exact 
orientation and correct participation in this function are probably nicely adjusted (see under 
feeding). The small muscles 4 and 5 probably also take an essential part in raising the 
membranous upper lip of the pharyngeal opening when feeding is in progress. 
Certain segmental relations may be noted. The minute antenna1 muscle in A&L aegypti 
arises from the anterior arm of the tentorium. In Culexpipiens with much larger antenna 
it is more conspicuous and rises far back from the apex of the tentorial spur. The labral 
muscles all arise from what has been taken to be the clypeus, 2 and 3 taking origin from 
the dorsum of the head in the clypeal region and 4 and 5 from the inner aspect of the falci- 
* The oesophagus is taken as extending from a line a little caudal of the cingulum muscle and excluding muscles 
17 and 18. 
309 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
form apodeme, that is that part corresponding to the clypeal surface. The mandibular 
muscles all take origin from the gena or parietal region of the head, the maxillary abductors 
from the same region. The maxillary retractor (9), however, arises from the front of the 
tentorial pit, that is from a part of the head capsule which, as already shown, is an extension 
backwards of the basal parts of the maxilla, the larval maxilla as ordinarily understood 
being the parts only of this structure distal to the origin of the maxillary palps. The labial 
parts in the larva are entirely rudimentary, as also is the hypopharynx, and the only muscles 
connected with these are the retractors of the labium arising from the tentorial pits and the 
tiny muscles at the salivary opening (no. 11). 
MUSCLES OF THE NECK 
The muscles of the neck are difficult to study owing to the way this structure is normally 
retracted and thrown into folds and also to the presence of the muscular diaphragm formed 
in this region by fibres from the oesophageal coat and other parts (see description of 
neck). Few muscles appear actually to be proper to this region, though the cervical collar 
gives origin to muscles passing into the head (notably no. 18) and insertion to muscles of 
the thoracic series, one of which (given as c in Fig. 3 1 (1)) is inserted into the basal fold of 
the neck membrane. Some muscles also pass from the thorax through the neck to be 
inserted into the tentorial spur (~21’ and dZl2’). The most nearly to be regarded as muscles 
proper to the neck are the two small muscles listed below as nos. 25 and 26 and shown in 
Fig. 32 (4) as b and b’. 
25. A small muscle arising from the collar dorso-laterally and inserted into the neck 
membrane laterally. 
26. A small muscle arising from the collar laterally along with the muscle given as a in 
the figures and inserted into the neck membrane on its ventro-lateral aspect. 
No. 25 decussates with muscle a as this passes into the thorax, the decussation lying 
external to the large tracheal vessels in the neck. There is a further decussation of muscles 
in this position a little posterior to this where two muscles, ~22’ and dZl2’ (see later), 
decussate at the base of the neck. 
Curious features of the larval musculature are the number of long thin muscles and the 
occurrence not infrequently of twin strands. Two such strands arise in connection with 
muscle a, decussating in the middle line dorsally behind the neck. These are not mentioned 
by Samtleben and as there is some doubt as to their exact nature they have not been shown 
in the figures. Two long twin strands also pass through the neck to the outer knot. Again 
their nature is somewhat obscure. 
MUSCLES OF THE THORAX AND ABDOMEN (Figs. 31,32) 
The muscles of the thorax and abdomen have been most minutely described by Samtleben 
(1929) in AL;des meigenensis and some other species. The following up of these in serial 
sections is difficult and tedious and they are best studied in whole mounted preparations. 
Very useful mounts can be made by slicing hardened larvae on a paraffin block as described 
in the section on technique. See also method of dissection of fresh or fixed material given 
by Wigglesworth (1942) and by Abul-Nasr (1950, p. 344). The muscles can also be studied 
in cleared specimens observed under polarised light as described by Imms (1939) or by the 
method of Kramer (1948). Kramer’s method is as follows: fix at 30” C. in Bouin’s fluid, 
310 
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
8-10 hours; followed by 50 per cent alcohol, 10 minutes; 70 per cent, 60 minutes; 95 per 
cent, 10 minutes; 0.5 per cent eosin in 95 per cent alcohol. Return to 95 per cent alcohol 
and oil of wintergreen added dropwise at hourly intervals for 4-5 days. Transfer to oil of 
wintergreen. Care is necessary when adding oil of wintergreen to prevent collapse. The 
effect is much like that obtained with polarised light. By focusing the light and moving the 
larva about, the muscles stand out in the different depths of the specimen as these are 
examined. For technique of using polarised light see chapter on technique. 
Figure 31. Muscles of the neck and thorax. 
1 View of dorsal musculature of neck and thorax of fourth instar larva of &Yes aegypti. 
2 View of ventral musculature of neck and thorax of same. 
Lettering: a, muscle arising along with b’ (muscle 26) from collar laterally and passing to inner 
knot. Accompanying it are some thread-like twin muscles passing to the external knot; 6, muscle 
25 of neck; b’, muscle 26 of neck; c, muscle (double) inserted into neck fold; C’s, gastric caeca; 
d-e, muscles from inner knot to dorsal thoracic wall; g, thoracic ganglia ; ht, heart ; Oe, oesophagus 
with cervical diaphragm; Pv, proventriculus; sg, salivary gland; T, tentorium; tt, tracheal trunk. 
On the left-hand side of 1 only the muscles inserted into the lower fold of the neck are shown. 
On the right only those passing through the neck are depicted. Muscles are numbered according 
to Samtleben’s system (see text). 
Samtleben’s system of nomenclature enables the many muscles of the larva to be con- 
veniently dealt with and the numbers given by him greatly simplify reference. Passing from 
the relatively simple arrangement in the abdominal segments this author finds the general 
plan similar, though more complicated, in the three thoracic segments. He distinguishes 
(1) a dorsal longitudinal series, (2) a ventral longitudinal series, and (3) a dorso-ventral series. 
There is also ventrally in each segment a transverse intersegmental muscle which takes its 
notation from the segment lying behind it. Both dorsal and ventral longitudinal muscles 
normally number up to nine in each quadrant in abdominal segments or somewhat more in 
some thoracic segments. In the abdomen nos. l-4 in both dorsal and ventral series are 
usually relatively large muscles. Nos. 1 and 2 are normally directed outwards and forwards 
311 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
and lie deeper in the body than 3 and 4 which slant in an opposite direction. The arrange- 
ment, however, is less regular in the thorax. The remaining numbers are usually small or 
even quite thread-like. The dorso-ventral series are distinguished as (1) median dorso-ventral, 
of which there may be three, nos. l-3 from within outwards, towards the front of the 
5 
Figure 32. Muscles of thorax and abdomen. 
1 One side of third abdominal segment showing dorsal musculature as seen from inside. 
2 The same showing ventral musculature. 
3 Lateral view of the same as seen from outside, showing also the dorso-ventral series and 
position of large oenocytes. 
4 Lateral view of musculature of neck and thorax as seen from outside. 
5, 6 Dorsal and ventral musculature of first abdominal segment with adjoining muscles of 
metathorax to show continuation of series. 
Lettering: a, b, b’, c, as in Fig. 3 1; C’s, gastric caeca; g, ganglia of ventral chain; oe, large 
oenocytes; MS, mesothorax; vtr, transverse muscle of second abdominal segment crossing in 
front of ganglion of segment; I-IV, abdominal segments. 
Muscles are numbered in accordance with Samtleben’s system, the dorsal and ventral longi- 
tudinal series being indicated by their numbers only. 
segment (Fig. 32 (l), (2), (3)); and (2) lateral dorso-ventral, of which there may be five, 
nos. 2-4 situated laterally about the middle of the segment, and no. 5 towards its posterior 
end, no. 1 being present only in the first abdominal segment; and (3) intersegmental dorso- 
ventral (in thorax only) where the muscle, usually oblique, passes dorso-ventrally from one 
312 
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
segment to the next (Fig. 32 (4)). Abdominal segments II-VII, except for a few small 
details, have the typical musculature as shown in Fig. 32 (I), (2). Segment I, as also 
segment VIII, conform to the general plan, but show some differences (see Fig. 32 (5), (6)). 
Roughly speaking the arrangement as regards the main classes holds for the thorax. 
By using the shortened forms dim and vim respectively for the dorsal and ventral 
longitudinal series, mdv and Zdv for the median and lateral dorso-ventral and other appro- 
priate lettering preceded by the number of the segment, any desired muscle can be indicated. 
To shorten such designations as much as possible I shall, when referring to muscles in this 
way, omit the letter m indicating muscle. The following therefore will be the abbreviations 
used in the figures and text: 
dl dorsal longitudinal ; 
VZ ventral longitudinal; 
mdv median dorso-ventral ; 
Zdv lateral dorso-ventral ; 
idv intersegmental dorso-ventral ; 
vtr transverse intersegmental. 
Samtleben also gives the muscles names, for example musculus pronoti secundus (of the 
dorsal longitudinal series) for I dZ 2, and musculus dorsoventralis intersegmentalis meso- 
thoracis for II idv. The shortened form, however, appears to be all that is necessary 
here. 
After working for some time on the musculature of ACdes aegypti larva I have been 
unable to note any significant departure from Samtleben’s description for A. meigenensis. 
Space does not permit of a detailed description and all that can be done in this respect has 
been to give figures for the appearance of the muscles in a typical abdominal segment and 
in the thorax. Where no doubt exists as to the number of a muscle in Samtleben’s system, 
it is so numbered in the figures, the segment to which it relates being left to the reader to 
supply. Where, as in the prothorax, it has not always been possible to identify a muscle in 
this way it has been indicated by a letter with a reference in the legend. Where two numbers 
are given to the same muscle, the higher number or numbers refer to smaller muscles 
hidden under the larger muscle shown. Figures giving dorsal and ventral views show the 
muscles as they are seen in a bisected larva mounted and viewed from inside. In the 
lateral views, the better to show relations, muscles are shown as though viewed from 
outside. 
A few general remarks are called for. The longitudinal series take origin and are inserted 
at the intersegmental lines, the cuticle at such situations usually being to some extent 
indented or even folded inwards. The muscles, however, are commonly continued with but 
little interruption into muscles of the adjoining segment, being mutually inserted and taking 
origin largely from each other. In the thorax muscles tend to arise in groups from what 
may be termed ‘ knots ‘, much as in the tracheal system. Such ‘ knots ’ for a given segment 
may not always be at quite the same level, for example in the prothorax (Fig. 32 (4)) where 
those from an outer knot are shown in full black and those from an inner knot by dotting. 
In addition to muscles proper to the larva there are, in the fourth instar and especially 
nearing pupation, the developing imaginal muscles. These newly forming muscles are very 
conspicuous owing to their numerous nuclei and dark staining which makes them quite 
distinct from the pale larval muscles. They relate almost entirely to the future wing and leg 
muscles and are restricted to the thorax. Some of the larval muscles may, however, undergo 
313 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
a form of reconstruction with accumulation of nuclei which makes them conspicuous. 
Both forms of muscle will be dealt with later when describing changes in meta- 
morphosis. 
Little can be said regarding functions of this complicated musculature. Synchronised 
action by the abdominal series could obviously result in the sculling-like movements of the 
abdomen so characteristic of the larva when swimming. Of the thoracic muscles a certain 
number in the prothorax are concerned with movements of the head and one at least (c) 
is inserted into the basal fold of the neck. It seems probable that to a large extent the 
thoracic muscles may be concerned mainly in maintaining the correct shape of the parts. 
It is of interest that not a single muscle appears to be directly in connection with the large 
lateral hairs of the thorax or abdomen. 
MUSCLES OF THE EIGHTH AND ANAL SEGMENTS (Fig.33) 
Owing to changes in the general structure of the parts due to the presence of the siphon and 
other features, application of Samtleben’s numbers to the different bands is, except in a 
general way, difficult. Beyond noting that the musculature is abnormal Samtleben does 
not include these segments in his survey. They have been described, however, to some 
extent by me in Anopheles (Christophers, 1922,1923) and also by Imms (1908) in that genus. 
In Ai;des aegypti a notable feature is the number and complexity of the muscles present. In 
all there are some thirty-five pairs of muscles. Space does not permit of a detailed descrip- 
tion, but it seems desirable that they should at least be indicated and the attached list and 
figures with the numbered muscles will enable them to be identified. 
There are represented in the terminal parts almost certainly at least three and possibly 
four segments, namely segments VIII, IX, X and XI. Segment VIII appears to be mainly 
that segment. It possesses a dorsal and a ventral series of muscles as in previous segments. 
The dorsal series is represented by three small muscles, the siphon muscles a, b and c 
(nos. l-3), and one large muscle (no. 4). The siphon muscles noted may be regarded as 
eighth segment muscles of the dorsal series carried up to intersegmental line VIII-IX at 
the anterior border of the stigmatic plate (ninth tergite). Muscle 4, the largest muscle in 
these parts, passes from intersegmental line VII-VIII external to the siphon muscles to be 
inserted at the posterior border of segment VIII into a point situated mid-laterally where 
a number of other muscles are also inserted or take origin. For convenience I have termed 
this dorsal knot VIIZ. Except that in the dorsal series there is a reduced number of muscles 
as compared with preceding segments, there is no very marked change from the normal 
arrangement other than the carrying up of the siphon muscles into the siphon. 
The ventral series consists of four muscles on each side (nos. 5-8) arising as in pre- 
vious segments at intersegmental line VII-VIII ventro-laterally. Instead, however, of all 
Figure 33. Muscles and other structures of terminal segments. 
1 Lateral view of terminal segments showing musculature as seen from outside. 
2 The same of the eighth abdominal segment viewed from the medial sagittal plane, showing 
especially the tracheal plexus and the muscles 34, 35 associated with this. 
Lettering : a, dorsal anal papilla; a’, ventral anal papilla; b, tracheal plexus ; Co, colon; ht, 
terminal chamber of heart; k, lateral and dorsal muscular knots; s, siphon; tt, tracheal trunk. 
Muscles are numbered in accordance with list of muscles of the terminal segments given in the 
text. The appearance is that given when muscles are viewed by polarised light. 
314 

LARVAL STRUCTURE 
proceeding to the ventral intersegmental line VIII-IX, they fan out widely to be inserted at 
points ranging from near the middle line ventrally to the dorsal aspect of the segment along 
the lower border of the siphon. In doing so they pass beneath muscle 4 of the dorsal 
series. 
Besides the dorsal and ventral series there are two muscles of the dorso-ventral series, 
which appear to be respectively I&. 2 and I&. 3 (nos. 10 and 11). In addition there is a 
peculiar series of small muscles arising laterally from the segment and also fanning out 
from near the mid-ventral line to the dorsal aspect of the segment. I have entered these in 
the table as lateral series (nos. 12-17). 
Segment IX is represented by tergal and sternal parts. The tergal parts are largely 
carried to the apex of the siphon as the stigmatic plate. The whole siphon from base to 
apex appears to be mainly ninth tergite which in the later stages in the hypoderm is slit by 
developing fissures into the lateral and median parts of the future ninth tergite of the pupa 
and adult. As with the anterior siphon muscles the two posterior muscles d and e (nos. 18 
and 21) are drawn up to the stigmatic plate. These should represent the more median tergal 
series IX-X, though there is some indication that no. 21 may be from a ventral series. 
Besides these are the muscles nos. 19 and 20 which may be of this series. They pass from 
behind towards the edge of the siphon. 
The sternal parts of segment IX as shown by the muscle attachments largely remain in 
their normal situation. As shown by muscles nos. 5, 9 and 16, the anterior border of the 
ninth sternite lies posterior to a rather prominent intersegmental bulged portion and is not 
at the same level as the line of dorsal muscle insertions. This area is indicated by both the 
male and female genital rudiments. 
The quite numerous muscles of the anal segment belong to the dorsal series. There 
appears to be no ventral series. They take origin mainly from the dorsal knot and pass to 
the bases of the anal papillae (external aspect) and ventral fan area. Others arise from the 
saddle plate a little distance posterior to its anterior border. These are muscles 30,3 1 and 32. 
No. 30 passes to the sides of the dorsal hair plaque. Nos. 31 and 32, each formed of twin 
bands, are inserted into the bases respectively of the dorsal and ventral anal papilla of its 
side on the internal aspect close to the anal margin. These would appear to be muscles 
pertaining to that part of the anal segment that later forms the cerci, that is pertaining to 
tergite XI. There is also a small lateral series. These arise from a point marked k in Fig. 33 (1) 
near the ventral edge of the saddle plate. 
Apart from other points of interest the remarkable distortion of the parts indicated by 
the arrangement of the ventral series of segment VIII gives strong support to the view that 
the terminal spiracles of the larva are those of the eighth segment drawn up in some fashion 
behind this segment. Besides mere movement of the spiracles there is evidently some distor- 
tion of the hinder parts of the segment. 
Mention should here be made of the curious little muscles 34 and 35 which pass into the 
capillary plexus of tracheoles behind the terminal chamber of the heart (Fig. 33 (2); 
36 (5)). For a further description of these and related parts see under circulatory 
system. 
Belonging to the muscular system are two alary muscles. These are the two most 
posterior of the alary series, being situated at the points corresponding to the two pairs of 
pericardial cells present at the anterior end of the eighth segment. The origin of one of 
these, the more posterior, is shown in Fig. 33 (1) just above the dorso-ventral muscle 11. 
316 
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
MUSCLES OF THE EIGHTH AND ANAL SEGMENTS 
Segment VIII. 
Dorsal series. 
l-3. Respectively from within outwards siphon muscles c, a, b, arising from tergal area on 
each side of median line towards anterior end of the segment and passing into siphon 
anteriorly (see under siphon). 
4. Largest muscle of segment. Arises dorso-laterally at intersegmental line VII-VIII 
external to 3 and inserted into the dorsal knot VIII (see text). 
Ventral series. 
5-8. Strong bands arising from intersegmental line VII-VIII on each side of middle line 
ventrally in order given from within outwards, and inserted: 
5. Near median line into base of sternite IX anterior to rudiments of caecus and 
genital buds in female and male respectively. 
6. Into dorsal knot VIII. 
7. On line of thickening below edge of base of siphon about level of pecten spines. 
8. As 7, but about level of middle of siphon. 
9. Smaller muscle arising from the intersegmental line VII-VIII external to 8 and inserted 
just dorsal to insertion of 5. 
Dorso-ventral series. 
10. Muscle at anterior border of segment, possibly Zdv. 2. 
11. Very broad short muscle about middle of segment corresponding to Zdv. 3 of previous 
segments. 
Lateral series (see text). 
12, 13. Small bands arising from lateral knot VIII, running parallel and inserted anterior to 
insertion of 8. 
14-16. Small bands arising close together from lateral knot VIII and inserted: 
14. Intersegmental line a little ventral to dorsal knot VIII. 
15. As 14 but a little ventral. 
16. Crossing beyond line between segment VIII and intersegmental bulge to be 
inserted external to 5 after passing ventral to that muscle and 9. 
17. Arising a little ventral to lateral knot and inserted into dorsal knot VIII after passing 
internal to 14 and 15. 
Segment IX (tergal series only represented: see text). 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. Arising from the intersegmental area between segment VIII and saddle plate and passing 
into siphon as the small siphon muscle. 
Arising external to 18, but after short passage inserted below basal margin of siphon 
internal to insertion of 7. 
Arising from dorsal knot VIII and inserted anterior to 19 near insertion of 8. 
Siphon muscle d. Arises internal to and ventral to dorsal knot VIII and passes into 
siphon along with 18 posteriorly. 
Anal segment. 
22-5. Arising from dorsal knot VIII and inserted: 
22. Near anterior border of saddle plate a little lateral to median line and muscles 32. 
23. Base of dorsal anal papilla of its side externally. 
24. Into sides of rectum towards its termination. 
25. Side of ventral fan posteriorly and near base of ventral anal papilla of its side. 
26-7. Arising just anterior to anterior edge of saddle plate and inserted: 
26. Side of ventral fan posteriorly. 
27. Small muscle arising near 26 and inserted into the lateral knot anal segment 
(see text). 
3=7 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
28-9. Arising lateral knot anal segment and inserted: 
28. Base of dorsal anal papilla of its side externally. 
29. Base of ventral anal papilla of its side internally. 
30-2. Arising close to middle line from saddle plate dorsally and inserted: 
30. Outer side of dorsal hair plaque. 
31. Inner side of base of ventral anal papilla of its side. Twin bundles. 
32. Inner side of base of dorsal anal papilla of its side. Twin bundles. 
In addition there are the alary muscles (33, 33’) (see Fig. 36 (8) aim) and the small muscles 
passing into the capillary tracheal complex posterior to the terminal chamber of the heart 
(34, 35) (see Fig. 33 (2)). 
REFERENCES 
(a) THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. and PURI, I. M. (1929). Why do Anopheles larvae feed at the surface and how? 
Trans. Far East. Ass. Trop. Med. 7th Congr. India 1927, 2, 736-8. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1930). Contribution g l’&ude de la biologie et de l’histophysiologie de Culex 
pipiens. Arch. Zool. Exp. Gen. 70, 281-431. 
FEDERICI, E. (1922). Lo stomaco della larva di Anopheles cZaviger Fabr. R. C. Accad. Lincei (5), 
31,264-8, 394-7. 
HURST, C. H. (1890). The post-embryonic development of a gnat (Culex). Proc. Trans. Liverp. 
Biol. Sot. Reprinted in vol. II of Studies from the Biological Laboratories of the Owens 
College. Guardian Press, Manchester. 
IMMS, A. D. (1907). On the larval and pupal stages of Anopheles maculipennis Meig. J. Hyg., 
Camb., 7, 291-316. 
KULAGIN, N. (1905). Der Kopfbau bei Culex und Anopheles. 2. wiss. Zool. 83, 285-335. 
MARTINI, E. (1929). Culicidae. In Lindner’s Die Fliegen der palaearktischen Region. Stuttgart. 
Part XI, 74-85. 
METALNIKOFF, S. (1902). Beitrzge zur Anatomie und Physiologie der Miickenlarve. Bull. Acad. 
Sci. St-Pe’tersb. 17, 49-58. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1901). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., Camb., 1, 
5 l-73. 
RASCHKE, E. W. (1887). Die Larve von Culex nemorosus. Arch. Naturgesch. Jahrb. 53,1, 133-63. 
SALEM, H. H. (1931). Some observations on the structure of the mouth-parts and fore-intestine 
of the fourth stage larva of Ai;des (Stegomyia) fasciata. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 25,393-419. 
SAMTLEBEN, B. (1929). Zur Kenntnis der Histologie und Metamorphose des Mitteldarms der 
Stechmiickenlarven. Zool. Anz. 81, 97-109. 
SCHONICHEN, W. (1921). Prakticum der Insektenkunde. Ed. 2. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). The Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York and London. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
WESCHE, W. (1910). On the larval and pupal stages of West African Culicidae. Bull. Ent. Res. 1, 
7-50. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1930). The formation of the peritrophic membrane in insects with special 
reference to the larvae of mosquitoes. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 73, 593-616. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1931 b). See under (b). 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The storage of protein, fat, glycogen and uric acid in the fat-body 
and other tissues of mosquitoes. J. Exp. Biol. 19, 56-77. 
(b) THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
GILES, G. M. (1902). A Handbook of Gnats or Mosquitoes. Ed. 2. John Bale Sons and Danielsson, 
London. 
HURST, C. M. (1890). On the life history and development of a gnat (Culex). Ann. Rep. Trans. 
Manchester Micr. Sot. Guardian Press, Manchester. 
318 
REFERENCES 
KEILIN, D. (1944). Respiratory systems and respiratory adaptations in larvae and pupae of 
Diptera. Parasitology, 36, l-68. 
LANDA, V. (1948). Contributions to the anatomy of Ephemerid larvae. I. Topography and 
anatomy of the tracheal system. Mein. Sot. Zool. tche’cosl. no. 12. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. See under section (a). 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1930). A theory of tracheal respiration in insects. Proc. R. Sot. B, 106, 
229-50. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1931 a). The respiration of insects. Biol. Rev. 6, 181-220. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1931 b). The extent of air in the tracheoles of some terrestrial insects. 
Proc. R. Sot. B, 109, 354-9. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1938). The absorption of fluid from the tracheal system of mosquito 
larvae at hatching and moulting. J. Exp. Biol. 15, 248-54. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1950). A new method for injecting the tracheae and tracheoles of insects. 
Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 91, 217-23. 
(C) THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
ABUL-NASR, S. E. (1950). See references in ch. XIV (i), p. 354. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1922). The development and structure of the terminal abdominal segments 
and hypopygium of the mosquito with observations on the homologies of the terminal seg- 
ments of the larva. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 530-72. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1923). The structure and development of the female genital organs and 
hypopygium of the mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 698-719. 
IMMS, A. D. (1908). On the larval and pupal stages of Anopheles maculipennis. Parasitology, 1, 
103-32. 
IMMS, A. D. (1939). On the antenna1 musculature in insects and other arthropods. Quart. J. 
Micr. Sci. 81, 274. 
KRAMER, S. (1948). A staining procedure for the study of insect musculature. Science, 108, 141-2. 
SAMTLEBEN, B. (1929). Anatomie und Histologie der Abdominal- und Thoraxmuskulatur von 
Stechmiickenlarven. 2. wiss. ZooZ. 134, 179-269. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). See under section (a). 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). See under section (a). 
319 
XIV 
THE LARVA: 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE (cont.) 
(d) THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
The nervous system of the larva consists of the brain, the ventral nerve cord, certain 
accessory ganglia belonging to the stomogastric or visceral system and nerves issuing from 
or connecting these structures. Also coming under this head are the special sense organs, 
notably the ocelli and chordotonal organs. 
THE BRAIN (Fig. 34 (l), (2)) 
Apart from the general description of the brain of Anopheles larva by Imms (1908) little 
has been recorded of this organ in the mosquito larva or adult. For an account of what is 
known of the structure of the insect brain Snodgrass (1935), Imms (1938) and Wiggles- 
worth (1942) should be consulted together with references given by these authors. The 
brain or supra-oesophageal ganglion lies in the posterior portion of the head cavity, lying 
entirely behind the level of the ocelli and forming a narrow band stretching almost across 
the head. It consists of two lateral masses, the cerebral lobes, linked across the middle line 
by a narrow commissure, cerebral commissure. It is also linked with the first ganglion of 
the ventral nerve cord or sub-oesophageal ganglion (g. 1) on each side by a connective, 
&cum-oesophageal connective, passing from each cerebral lobe around the oesophagus. In 
structure it consists of an outer cellular cortical layer and a light staining medullary portion 
of nerve branchings, neuropile, which, besides occupying the central portions of the 
Figure 34. Brain and ventral nerve cord. 
1 Dorsal view of head of fourth instar larva showing the pharynx (shaded) and chief muscles 
with the position and appearance of the brain. 
2 Anterior view of right half of the brain and sub-oesophageal ganglion of fourth instar larva 
with the position of issuing nerves. Reconstruction. 
3 Dorsal view of the thoracic ganglia showing position of large nerve cells. 
4 Ventral view of the same. 
5 Transverse section of thoracic ganglion. 
6 The same of an abdominal ganglion. 
Lettering: a, protocerebrum; a’, neuropile of protocerebrum; b, deutocerebrum; c, tritocere- 
brum; d, cerebral commissure; an.r, germinal bud of antenna; fg, frontal ganglion; g, sub-oeso- 
phageal ganglion; gc, ganglionic connectives ; gc’, intra-ganglionic connective tracts ; m. 2, median 
retractor of flabellum; m. 3, lateral retractor of flabellum; m. 24, tentorial dilator muscle of the 
oesophagus ; n, issuing nerve ; MC, large nerve cells; ne, nucleated sheath of ganglion; np, neuro- 
pile; 0, optic lobe; o’, o”, o’“, neuropile of optic chiasma; P, pharynx; snc, ground mass of small 
nerve cells; t. 2, dorsal cephalic trachea; t. 10, ventral cephalic trachea; 1-8, cerebral nerves as 
given in the list of head nerves in the text. 
320 
Figure 34 t. 
8 2 
321 CH 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
different lobes, forms tracts connecting the different parts of the brain as well as being 
continued into the commissure and connectives and into the nerves issuing from the brain. 
Compared with that of the adult the larval brain would appear to be relatively simple in 
structure, the cortical layer consisting almost entirely of small cells with deeply staining 
nuclei and scanty cytoplasm, though larger cells are present in some areas. 
From its outer form, and especially from the appearances given by the medullary 
neuropile, there can be distinguished the three basic component portions of the insect 
brain, namely the fore-brain or protocerebrum (a), the mid-brain or deutocerebrum (b) 
and the hind-brain or tritocerebrum (c). 
The protocerebral lobes form the median and hind portions of the main brain mass. 
Internally they are linked across the middle line by the cerebral commissure (4. Externally 
they carry the optic lobes (0). The commissure is composed almost entirely of neuropile 
and is quite narrow. There are present within it, however, some small regularly arranged 
nuclei. The optic lobes are pear-shaped with their bases abutting upon the protocerebral 
lobes and their apices continued into the optic tracts leading to the optic nerves (I). These 
pass outwards to the areas occupied by the developing compound eyes and give off in their 
course a branch to the ocellus. The optic lobes are at first relatively small, when the com- 
pound eyes have only begun to form, but later they increase considerably in size so that 
they extend outwards almost to meet the eyes fanning out to the area of developing 
ommatidia. The protocerebral lobes show a cortex composed of very densely packed small 
cells. There does not appear to be any appearance of distinct mushroom bodies or corpora 
pedunculata as described in many insect brains, though portions of surface showing 
aggregated cells referred to later may represent these. In the centre of each lobe is a some- 
what lobulated area of neuropile (a’) and between this and a more externally situated area 
of neuropile (0’) in the optic lobe are two masses of neuropile (0” and 0”‘) which possibly 
represent parts of the optic chiasma. Arising from the posterior and ventral aspect of each 
protocerebral lobe is the curious small nerve (nerve no. 9) which may represent the tegu- 
mentary nerve described in some insect brains. There is no obvious neuropile extension to 
this as with the other nerves, but some large cells are present near its origin. 
The deutocerebrum consists on each side of a lobe lying somewhat ventral to the proto- 
cerebral lobe. It is separated from the latter by a deep groove in which the dorsal cephalic 
tracheal trunk passes in its course to the dorsal region of the head. The deutocerebrum is 
produced into a conical projection from which the antenna2 nerve (2) arises. The larger cells 
previously referred to are chiefly present scattered over the surface of this lobe and neigh- 
bouring parts of the tritocerebrum. Their number seems to vary considerably in different 
preparations. 
The tritocerebrum is an inconspicuous portion of the brain lying at the root of the circum- 
oesophageal connective. It gives rise to the nerve on each side proceeding to the frontal 
ganglion and labrum, Zabrofiontal nerve (3). 
The circum-oesophageal connectives are stout structures which, in addition to neuropile, 
contain on their external aspects a fair thickness of cellular cortical substance. From near 
their lower end there arise from a common origin the accessory mandibular nerve (4) 
and mandibular nerve (5). Where they terminate in the cornua of the sub-oesophageal 
ganglion the maxillary nerve (6) takes origin. 
The sub-oesophageal ganglion is a heart-shaped structure with its lateral angles drawn out 
to merge into the connectives. Posteriorly it is linked to the first thoracic ganglion by long 
322 
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
connectives, interganglionic connectives. From the ventral aspect of its lateral angles there 
takes origin on each side a stout nerve passing to the labial rudiment, labial nerve (7) and 
from almost the same spot but passing more ventrally is a nerve, hypostomal nerve (8) 
passing to an enlargement near the cuticle just internal to the hypostomal suture. 
The frontal ganglion (fg) is the chief ganglion of the stomogastric system. It lies in the 
median line above the anterior portion of the roof of the pharynx. It is pear-shaped with 
its narrow end pointing posteriorly. At its lateral angles it receives the frontal connectives. 
Posteriorly it gives off the recurrent pharyngeal nerve (10) which passes backwards in the 
middle line over the roof of the pharynx to the notch at the posterior end of this organ and 
beyond connecting up with the stomogastric system. A small nerve is also given off from 
the ganglion anteriorly passing forwards to the region of the upper lip of the pharynx. 
In the accompanying table (Table 20) the nerves arising from the brain and sub- 
oesophageal ganglion are named and given numbers with a brief statement of their origin 
and distribution. 
NO. Name 
n. 1 Optic tract 
n. 2 Antenna1 
n. 3 Labrofrontal 
n. 3a Labral 
n. 3b Frontal 
connective 
n. 4 Accessory 
mandibular 
n. 4a Infra-orbital 
n. 5 Mandibular 
n. 6 Maxillary 
n. 7 Labial 
n. 8 Hypostomal 
n. 9 Tegumentary 
n. 10 Recurrent 
pharyngeal Table 20. Tabular statement of nerves of the head 
Origin 
Optic lobe 
Deutocerebrum 
Base of circum-oesophageal com- 
missure (tritocerebrum) 
Branch of 3 at crest of pharynx Course 
Fans out to area of developing imaginal eye 
Passes forwards to enter base of antenna1 rudiment 
Passes forwards by side of pharynx giving branch 
to 4 and dividing into 3 a and 3 b 
Continues forwards towards falciform apodeme 
and passes beneath lateral retractor of flabella to 
clypeal and labral region 
Over roof of pharynx to lateral angle of pharynx Branch of 3 turning inwards over 
crest 
Junction of circum-oesophageal 
connective with comua of sub- 
oesophageal ganglion in common 
with 5 
Branch of 4 near origin 
Takes origin in common with 4 just 
above comua of sub-oesopha- 
geal ganglion 
Junction of connective with cornua 
of sub-oesophageal ganglion 
Takes origin from ventral surface 
of sub-oesophageal ganglion to- 
wards base of comua 
Arises in common with 7, but 
passes external and ventral to this 
Takes origin from posterolateral 
aspect of brain 
Hinder end of frontal ganglion Sends branch to plexus joining up with branch 
from 4 and continues to angle of mouth. Gives 
off4a 
Passes ventral to ventral cephalic trachea to end in 
thickening close to cuticle in region of infra- 
orbital hairs. Supplies integument and adductor 
muscles 
Forms thickened trunk. Enters mandible at inner 
angle of base proximal to molar lobe 
Enters maxilla giving off branch to basal part of 
maxillary rudiment just external to hypostomal 
suture 
Divides into two branches. one passing ventral to 
labial rudiment to lip of invagination, the other 
passing dorsally to enter base of rudiment 
Passes to hypodermis just internal to the hypo- 
stoma1 suture about its middle where it forms an 
enlargement 
Crossing dorsal cephalic trachea has enlargement 
giving off branch to dorsum of occiput. Can be 
traced to region of tentorial pit 
Passes backwards 
and beyond over roof of pharynx to notch 
The ventral nerve chain consists, besides the sub-oesophageal ganglion, which may be 
considered the first ganglion of the chain, of eleven further ganglia, namely three thoracic 
corresponding to the three thoracic segments and eight abdominal ganglia corresponding 
to the abdominal segments one to eight. Each ganglion is double consisting of two closely 
323 21-2 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
compacted lateral ganglia. The connectives linking the sub-oesophageal and first thoracic 
ganglia are very long whilst the three thoracic ganglia lie close together with very short 
connectives. The abdominal ganglia lie towards the anterior end of their respective 
segments, except the first which as development proceeds becomes drawn towards the 
metathoracic ganglion with which in the pupa it is fused. The ganglion of the eighth seg- 
ment does not in the larva differ noticeably in the male or female and gives no evidence 
of composite nature. 
The ganglia of the chain, like the brain, have a cellular cortical layer and medullary 
neuropile. In the cortex of the thoracic ganglia there are, in addition to the small cells 
resembling those of the brain, many larger cells, some of these very large and conspicuous 
in sections. These latter are especially numerous in certain areas of the ganglion, see 
Fig. 34 (3), (4), and appear to be large unipolar cells with their pointed end directed in- 
wards towards the neuropile. The neuropile consists of two central tracts continuing the 
connectives and in each lateral half a central neuropile mass proper to the ganglion. The 
abdominal ganglia are smaller and possess few or none of the very large cells seen in the 
thoracic ganglia. They show two lateral masses of neuropile proper to each half of the 
ganglion, the connectives appearing to be continued into or abutting upon this without 
forming through tracts (gc’). 
From both thoracic and abdominal ganglia nerves issue on each side from about the 
middle point of the ganglion, except in the case of the eighth segment where the issuing 
nerves arise posteriorly. The distribution of these can only here be very generally indicated, 
since a special study would be necessary for such a purpose and for further information the 
authorities already mentioned should be consulted. In the thorax a leash of nerves passes 
outwards from each ganglion towards the developing coxal regions which as development 
in the larva proceeds are becoming more and more defined by constrictions in the hypo- 
dermal walls. Similarly from each abdominal ganglion a nerve passes outwards beneath 
the ventral muscles to pass up the side of the segment in the region of the ventral trachea 
until it reaches the outer margin of the large tracheal trunk. From thence it turns inwards 
and is distributed to the dorsal muscles and other structures. Near its origin a branch 
turns posteriorly to end among the ventral muscles. In the eighth segment two large nerves 
pass from the ganglion of that segment, one on each side of the proximal portion of the 
rectum. Each then divides into two, one branch going to the posterior region of the siphon, 
the other passing into the anal segment. 
THE VENTRAL SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM (Fig. 38(4),(5)) 
This consists of a line of nerves situated in the median line dorsal to the ventral nerve 
chain. Whilst such a series appears to correspond to the median nerves of many insects it 
does not in AL;des aegypti larva so far as can be made out follow the usual course as 
described for this series. Normally in insects a median nerve arises in each segment from 
the posterior part of the ganglion of the ventral nerve cord, taking origin between the con- 
nectives, and passes backwards to the transverse intersegmental muscle at the anterior 
border of the segment behind. At this muscle with which it is closely associated it gives rise 
to lateral branches proceeding outwards to the region of the spiracles. In A. aegypti larva 
the nerves pass from one transverse muscle to the next. In their course they pass over the 
ganglion but they do not enter or arise from this. The line of nerve forming the series may 
324 
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
be clearly separate from the ventral chain or more closely approximated to this especially 
over the ganglia. But in the latter case they can be traced without any break past this 
structure. The nerves may possess only relatively few nuclei, but in the later stages of the 
larva are conspicuous for the numerous nuclei along their course. The series can be readily 
followed from the transverse muscle at the anterior border of the first abdominal segment 
to that at the anterior border of the eighth segment where the chain ends. The transverse 
muscle of segment I crosses the ganglion, but those of succeeding segments except the 
eighth lie a little forward of the ganglion. That at segment VIII passes over the front of the 
ganglion. The chain, if present at all, is not very clearly traceable in the thorax, though a 
nerve seems to pass from the third thoracic ganglion to the first transverse muscle. Small 
nuclei are usually present arranged about the transverse muscle in the region of the nerve 
and at their lateral terminations, but no lateral nerves have been made out. The appearance 
of the system will be clear from the figure 38. 
A system of sympathetic nerves also forms part of the complex known as the retrocerebral 
complex. As, however, this system is very closely associated with the aorta and corpora 
allata, its description is deferred to a later section under the circulatory system. 
(e) SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
Under this head may be considered the larval ocelli, the developing compound eyes as these 
are seen in the larva, certain cuticular sensory papillae andpits and the structures commonly 
referred to as chordotonal organs. 
THE LARVAL OCELLI 
These come under the designation of lateral ocelli, or as sometimes termed, stemmata, as 
distinct from the dorsal ocelli of many adult insects. In the mosquito larva they form a 
close cluster of dark pigmented ‘eye-spots’ situated on the most prominent portion of the 
lateral aspect of the head, lying behind and in the mid-concavity of the developing com- 
pound eyes when these appear (Fig. 35 (l), (2)). A very complete description of the larval 
ocelli of Culex pipiens has been given by Constantineanu (1930). * In Culex pipiens ac- 
cording to Constantineanu the ocelli of each side are five in number arranged as shown in 
Fig. 35 (3). In C. molestus the arrangement is much as in C. pipiens, forming a compact 
group of closely aggregated spots. In kdes aegypti there are also five ocelli, but the 
appearance and arrangement are somewhat different. The general appearance is of three 
ocelli placed one above the other, the top and bottom ocelli being slightly posterior to the 
middle one (Fig. 35 (l), (2)). Cl oser inspection, especially in the earlier instars, however, 
shows that whilst the middle ocellus is single each of the other two is double, thus giving 
the five ocelli as in Culex pipiens. Further the large middle ocellus is more or less circular, 
not lengthened as in C. pipiens. 
The general structure of an ocellus as seen in sections is shown in Fig. 35 (4), (5). Each 
ocellus forms a cone with its base directed outwards. Under the but little modified cuticle 
is a clear area, lens. Beneath this is a layer of elongate oval eosin-staining clear bodies 
corresponding to the pneumocones of the compound eye (crystalline bodies of authors). 
(1 * See also Zavrel (1907), Demo11 
938), Wigglesworth (1942). (1917), and for a general account of ocelli in insects, Snodgrass ww, Imms 
325 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
The remainder of the ocellus consists of elongate retinula columns containing rhabdomes, 
the retinula cells which compose these being heavily laden in the upper halves especially 
with pigment granules entirely obscuring their outlines (Fig. 35 (4)). * 
THE COMPOUND EYES 
These first appear in the early fourth instar larva as eyebrow-like dark streaks on the side 
of the head anterior to the ocelli. These areas increase progressively in an anterior direction 
by the appearance of successive rows of developing ommatidia until they occupy a large 
part of the lateral surface of the head. The omrnatidia first appear as modified hypodermal 
cells which develop pigment and become arranged to form columns containing rhabdoms. 
At their base is a plexus of nerve fibres with nuclei continuous with the optic tracts. For 
further description of these changes see the account of the development of the compound 
eyes in Vanessa by Johansen and some further remarks given later under pupal changes. 
SENSORY PAPILLAE 
Of sensory papillae may be mentioned those at the apex of the antennae and of the maxil- 
lary palps. Two very complicated eminences with characteristic papillae constitute the 
central portion of each side of the labial plate. Sensory papillae are also present on the 
lateral portions of the stigmata at the apex of the respiratory siphon. 
CHORDOTONAL ORGANS (Fig. 35 ((7)-11)) 
The chordotonal organs (chordotonal sensilla or scolopidia) are a simple type of sense organ 
in the form of a ligament or ligaments, attached to the integument by one extremity and by 
* Details of structure of the insect eye, including various forms of ocelli and the compound eye, are given in the 
very full accounts, in addition to those already mentioned, by Grenacher (1879), Hickson (1885), Johansen (1893), 
Redikorzew (1900), Radl(1905), Bugnion and Popoff (19 14) ; see also under sense organs of the imago (chapter XXIX). 
8 
9 
10 
11 Figure 35. Sense organs. 
Ocelli and developing compound eye of fourth instar larva of A2de.s aegypti. 
Outline of ocelli. 
Outline (enlarged) from figure by Constantianu of ocelli of Culex pipiens. 
Longitudinal section through ocellus. 
Transverse section at level of crystalline bodies. 
Transverse section through developing ommatidia of compound eye. 
Chordotonal organ of first and second abdominal segment of fourth instar larva of ACdes 
aegypti. 
Tangential section of first abdominal segment showing the chordotonal organ passing from 
ventral to dorsal aspect. 
Basal portion of chordotonal organ d of siphon. 
Insertion of chordotonal organ c into lateral lobe of the stigmatic plate of siphon and the 
small chordotonal organ a at apex of siphon. 
Lateral view of siphon to show course of the chordotonal organs a, b, c, d. 
Lettering: a, b, c, d, chordotonal organs as listed in text; cb, crystalline bodies; g, ganglion of 
first abdominal segment ; Ze, lens ; Zm, ventral longitudinal muscles of segment; oc, ocellus; 
oe, large oenocytes ; om, developing compound eye ; pg, pigment ; rb, rhabdom ; TC, retinula cells ; 
scp, scolopidium; scpn, nerve to same; sp, spiracle; I, II, abdominal segments. 
326 
I 
" olmm. 
'L--.--J 
Cb 
-Pg 
5 
, O-05mm. , 
O-02mm. 6 
L I Olmm. 
I I 
a 
._ d 
Figure 35 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
a short strand of connective tissue at the other, containing characteristic nerve endings, 
scolopales, the organs being considered as sensitive to mechanical stimuli or changes in 
tension. Such organs may be present in various parts of the body in different insects and 
have been described particularly in the abdominal segments of the larvae of Nematocera 
where they are most readily seen. Their structure has been minutely described by Graber 
(1882), as seen in the young Chironomus larva and in the transparent larva of Corethra 
(Chaoborus). In the latter they are present in all but the first and last body segments. In 
A&7es aegypti larva they are most readily seen in the transparent stages of the living larva 
or in preparations of such stages. The most conspicuous is the organ in the first abdominal 
segment (Fig. 35 (7)) h w ere the resemblance to Graber’s figure is very evident. The cords 
in each segment pass diagonally from before backwards and from the ventral to the dorsal 
surface (Fig. 35 (8)). Demo11 (1917) notes that three pairs of sensilla are present in the 
siphon of the Culex larva. These are very clearly to be seen in the siphon of A&?es aegypti, 
passing up with the muscles of this organ, but readily distinguished from these by their 
narrower and less coloured appearance. 
One such organ (d> arises on each side from a base showing distinct scolopale appearances 
(Fig. 35 (11)) attached just below the lower edge of the siphon posteriorly and laterally 
somewhat dorsal to the pentad hair and about in line with the pecten spines of its side. 
Its tendon passes up the siphon posterior to the tracheal trunk and close to the siphon hair 
of its side to terminate in one or more branches at the base of the posterior lobes of the 
stigmatic plate. 
A second organ (c) with a similar base showing scolopale appearance is attached close to, 
but a little external and anterior to, organ d and about in line with the second or third 
scale of the comb. The tendon of this passes up external to the tracheal trunk crossing this 
obliquely to end in the lateral papilla of its side at the apex of the siphon. Dr Tate informs 
me that in Culex larva, where a tag, as in many mosquito larvae, is present on the lower 
margin of the siphon, this lies over a sensilla, which would appear to be that now being 
described. In A&?es aegypti larva, however, no tag is present and the sensilla is unpro- 
tected, a fact in keeping with other evidence that the larva of this mosquito is poorly 
adapted to life other than in comparatively sheltered conditions. 
A third cord (b) has an attachment at the anterior end of the eighth segment dorsally, 
passing backwards through this segment to enter the siphon on its anterior aspect. This 
passes up the siphon along with the muscles a, b, c to be inserted into the base of the felt 
chamber. Here the scolopale appearances are less distinct than in the two previous cases. 
There is a long basal cord in the eighth segment with some suggestive nuclei shortly before 
entering the siphon. 
What appears to be a fourth organ distinct from (b) more resembles those in the ab- 
dominal segments. This is a much smaller organ situated anterior to the felt chamber in the 
apex of the siphon (Fig. 35 (10)). It has three cords, one passing towards the apical rim of 
the siphon, one going to the tracheal trunk and one short cord to the side of the siphon tube 
a little below the siphon hair. 
328 
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
(f) CIRCULATORY SYSTEM AND ASSOCIATED TISSUES 
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (Figs.36-9) 
For a general account of the circulatory system in insects with bibliography see especially 
that by Wigglesworth (1942 a). 
As in insects generally the blood, haemolymph, in the mosquito larva is a relatively 
colourless fluid occupying extensive spaces throughout the body and maintained in circu- 
lation through pulsation of the dorsal vessel with certain membranous and other guiding 
structures. The dorsal vessel as usual in insects consists of an abdominal portion, heart, and 
a thoracic portion passing forwards to the head, aorta. In the larva, except that ostia (as 
also alary muscles and pericardial cells) are not present in the aorta, there is no great 
contrast in the two portions. Associated with the heart are the alary muscles, rather 
poorly developed in the larva, and the characteristic groups of pericardial cells (dorsal 
nephrocytes) set along its course. The dorsal diaphragm, which is such a prominent 
feature in many insects and in the adult mosquito, is little developed in the mosquito larva, 
possibly as a result of the great size of the large tracheal trunks. Certain membranes exist, 
notably at the anterior opening of the aorta, as also at the neck where there is a muscular 
diaphragm. In the developing imaginal buds of the advanced larva may also be seen the 
forerunners of the longitudinal partitions conspicuous in the legs of the imago. No 
accessory pulsating organs additional to the heart and aorta have been described in the 
larva. 
Other tissues convenient to describe along with the heart are: the haemolymph with its 
cellular constituents ; certain free cells usually referred to as phagocytes; the oenocytes ; 
and the fat-body. 
Closely associated with the aorta is the retrocerebral nerve complex described later. For 
physiology of the circulation and behaviour of the heart see section (g) in chapter XXXI 
(Physiology). 
The heart (Fig. 36). Among early descriptions of the heart in the larva or pupa of the 
mosquito see those by Raschke (1887, Culex nemorosus larva); Hurst (1890, Anopheles 
larva and Culex pupa) ; Metalnikoff (1902, Culex larva) ; Imms (1908, Anopheles larva 
and pupa). Several authors have studied the heart as seen in the transparent larva of 
Chaoborus (Corethra), namely Dogiel (1877); Lebrun (1926); Tzonis (1936). Lebrun, in 
the living larva suitably mounted after intra vitam staining, demonstrated in a very clear 
manner the ostia of the heart and the alary muscles. 
The anterior opening of the aorta in the head of Chironomus larva has been described 
by Holmgren (1904) and Imms gives a careful description of this complex part in the larva 
of Anopheles. Very helpful in this respect too is the description by Wigglesworth (1934) of 
the aortic sinus in Rhodnius. 
Recently a very complete study of the heart and associated tissues in the larva, pupa and 
imago of Anopheles quadrimaculatus, with references to other species, including CuZex 
pipiens and AC;des aegypti, has been made by Jones (1952, 1953, 1954) with, in addition to 
the morphology, much information given on the physiology of the heart and circulation in 
the mosquito as indicated in the chapter on physiology. 
The heart in A. aegypti larva does not differ materially from the description by Imms and 
others of this structure in Anopheles. In the living insect it can be seen pulsating between 
329 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
the two tracheal trunks which lie lateral to it. In sections it appears as a delicate tube with 
laterally placed nuclei which project into the lumen and are characteristically spaced at 
intervals (about three pairs to a segment). In each of the abdominal segments I-VII, 
situated somewhat forward in the segment, is a pair of lateral ostia. These are recognisable 
by the presence of twin nuclei, smaller than those of the heart wall, C ->f the cells guarding the 
PC”. __ kl c’ *OS 
-a r/M --__ 
__--- -Oh 
, 
pc’ ___---0 I 
\ 
‘\ 0 
\ \ li \ * ’ 
/,\ “0 0 iI II 
0 PJk 
05mm. I 
cpt - 
5 @lmm. 6 I 1 f 
cpt _ 
ht PC. . 
Figure 36. The heart and related structures. 
1 Showing heart and arrangement of nuclei, ostia and pericardial cells. 
2 Coronal section through heart showing lateral nuclei and fibrillae. a, floor of heart; b, roof 
of heart. 
3 Sagittal section showing ostia and ostial cells. 
4 Coronal section of terminal chamber of heart. 
5 Similar section through tracheal plexus. a, terminal branches of tracheae forming limiting 
membrane of tracheal plexus. 
6 Group of eight pericardial cells at an intersegment. 
7 Pericardial cells showing cortical layer of cytoplasm and two nuclei. 
8 Transverse section through abdominal segment showing alary muscles. 
Lettering : aim, alary muscle; cpt, crypt with tracheal cell; hn, nuclei of heart wall; ht, heart ; 
ht’, terminal chamber of heart; ht”, chamber posterior to heart occupied by tracheal plexus; 
OS, ostium; OS’, terminal ostium; osc, ostial cell; pc, pericardial cell; PC’, group of same at inter- 
segment; pc’, single pair of same at anterior end of first abdominal segment; tt, tracheal trunk; 
18,21, muscles of siphon; 34, more dorsal of double pair of muscles inserted into apex of tracheal 
plexus ; VII, VIII, abdominal segments. 
330 
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
ostia, one anterior and one posterior to the opening (Fig. 36 (3)). The openings are simple 
and slit-like. In each segment, just anterior to each pair of ostia, there is an ill-defined, and 
in the larva not very marked dilatation of the tube, pulsating chamber. Apart from the 
lateral openings of the ostia there are no valves in the heart. 
Anteriorly the heart proper passes without much change into the aorta. Posteriorly it 
terminates in a somewhat swollen terminal chamber. This chamber in the larva ends some- 
what abruptly about the middle of the eighth segment where it is closed posteriorly by a 
flattish membranous wall. This has an opening on each side of the middle line and there 
are small nuclei, resembling those at the ostia, in the intervening portion of wall and 
external to the openings, which therefore may be regarded as ostia, terminal ostia. 
The walls of the heart are thin, delicate and transparent. According to Imms there is a 
delicate membrane (sarcolemma) externally and internally. Fine oblique or transverse 
parallel and closely set striae are visable on close inspection (about 0.5,~ in thickness with 
intervals about twice this). According to Jones these fine muscular fibrillae are double and 
arranged spirally. Though muscular in nature the heart wall as a whole does not show up 
conspicuously under polarised light, though the fine fibrils are faintly illuminated. 
The tracheal plexus (Fig. 36 (5)). Beyond the terminal chamber the floor of the heart is 
continuous with a delicate membrane forming the floor of the structure previously referred 
to as the tracheal plexus (see under the tracheal system). It is from the chamber formed by 
the plexus, as shortly to be described, that the terminal ostia open into the heart and the 
plexus clearly forms an important adjunct to the organs of circulation being in effect a 
collecting chamber and an oxygenating organ. The plexus is formed by a mass of branching 
tracheole-like vessels which arise from short tubular crypts taking origin from the inner 
portions of the ventral walls of the tracheal trunks where these lie in the eighth segment and 
base of the siphon. The crypts number about fifteen to twenty on each tracheal trunk and 
are arranged in a staggered series extending from a little behind the anterior border of the 
eighth segment to some little distance within the base of the siphon. A few of the more 
anterior crypts lie over the terminal chamber of the heart, but the larger number are 
posterior to this structure. At the bottom of each crypt is a cell with a conspicuous large 
dark-staining nucleus and through the cytoplasm of these cells, as in a tracheal cell, there 
pass the tracheole-like vessels referred to. As with ordinary tracheoles these are devoid of 
taenidia. 
Branching in various directions, but in the main directed ventrally, the tracheoles in mass 
form a defined cone-shaped structure coming to a point just dorsal to the colon. Here it 
receives the insertion of the four small converging muscles as described in the section dealing 
with the muscles of the terminal segments. The cone on its lower surface is definitely de- 
limited by a delicate membrane previously mentioned as continuous with the ventral wall 
of the heart. The cone lies within, but does not fully occupy, a considerable space between 
the colon ventrally and the large tracheal trunks dorsally. The four small muscles coming 
from different directions to be attached to the point of the plexus presumably keep this 
structure suitably stretched in its correct position (Fig. 36 ((5)). 
The aorta (Fig. 37). The aorta is very similar in appearance to the heart, its walls showing 
the characteristic lateral nuclei at intervals. It is, however, unprovided with ostia and 
neither alary muscles nor pericardial cells are present along its course. The two most 
anterior ostia are at the anterior border of the first abdominal segment, where also the 
331 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
pericardial cells end. The aorta may, therefore, be considered as that portion of the dorsal 
vessel anterior to this. From thence it passes forwards in the thorax in the mid-dorsal line 
lying over the groove between the two median dorsal gastric caeca and then dorsal to the 
proventriculus and oesophagus to the neck. Just before reaching the neck it lies close 
beneath the tracheal commissure with on either side the corpora allata. A little further on 
it pierces, and its walls are blended with, the muscular diaphragm in the neck. It now 
passes forwards close to the dorsal wall of the oesophagus and pharynx to the cerebral 
commissure linking the two halves of the brain. Its relations in the final portion of its 
course are complex and important and merit special consideration. 
The prothoracic aortic sinus. Under this name Jones (1952, 1954) has described a specialised 
portion of the aorta in the prothorax which is dilated and can be seen in the living condi- 
tion, especially in the first instar larva, actively pulsating. The author describes and figures 
it as a relatively large bulb-like sinus or sac lying between the corpora allata and attached 
to these structures by tissue strands. A single pair of intra-aortic thickenings is present 
at the posterior extremity of the sinus which opens through a narrow valve anteriorly into 
a narrow continuation of the aorta where this terminates behind the supra-oesophageal 
ganglion. In the living Ai;des aegypti larva it is seen as a swollen pulsating portion of the 
aorta. But in sections the organ is not so conspicuous and beyond the fact that it dips 
down sharply under the commissure there may be little to notice, though in some cases 
there is some lateral dilatation and some folding of the walls. At about the junction of the 
anterior two-thirds with the posterior third, however, where the aorta is crossed and 
closely contacted on each side by a small trachea passing dorsally from the lateral trunk, 
the wall of the aorta is thickened and there is a cluster of nuclei distinct from the spaced 
nuclei of the rest of the organ (see also description of the aorta in the imago). 
The anterior termination of the aorta (Fig. 37 (l)-(3) ; 38 (1)). After passing the tracheal 
commissure and as the aorta approaches its anterior end it lies close to the dorsal wall of 
the pharynx, its ventral wall being closely adherent to, if not actually formed by, pharyngeal 
elements. At the pharyngeal notch it lies in the groove between the projections formed by 
the posterior ends of the pharyngeal plates, that is the groove in which the recurrent 
pharyngeal nerve also lies in its passage backwards. This groove is closed in dorsally by 
the cerebral commissure and so formed into a narrow passage-way. This passage-way is 
further restricted by two largish muscles coming from the dorsum of the head to be inserted 
into the posterior angles of the pharynx where these form the lateral boundaries of the 
Figure 37. Aortic opening and related structures. 
1 Sagittal section in median line of head giving lateral view of structures at anterior opening of 
aorta. 
2 Dorsal view of structures at anterior opening of aorta. Reconstruction. For explanation see 
under lettering. 
3 Posterior view of aortic opening. Reconstruction. 
Lettering : ao, aorta; Br, brain; Cc, cerebral commissure ; P, pharynx ; rn, recurrent nerve 
passing through gap at posterior angle of the pharynx over muscle 24 (cingulum) to floor of aorta 
where it continues into structures described under retrocerebral system; sn, blood sinus; sn’, 
membrane continued from sarcolemma of muscle 16 to that of 15 to form roof of sinus (sn) ; 
sn”, membrane passing from cerebral commissure to dorsum of head; 15-24, muscles as listed in 
text under muscles of head. 
332 
sn” 
\ 15 
II .I I 
o-1 mm. 
I a0 
I 0.1 mm. 
2 
Figure 37 
333 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
notch (dorsal suspensors of the pharynx; muscles no. 16). With the walls of this narrow 
way those of the aorta are blended, that is the dorsal wall is fused with the connective tissue 
of the commissure and the ventral wall with the pharyngeal wall and the sarcolemma of 
the two muscles referred to (Fig. 37 (1)). Here the aorta proper terminates. Passing out of 
this opening, however, the blood still finds itself restricted by a roof formed of thin 
membrane linking the voluminous sarcolemma of the two muscles referred to with that of 
the decussating muscles situated some distance forwards. This membrane converts the 
trough between the crests of the pharynx as far forwards as the decussating muscles into 
a covered way continuing the aorta as a blood sinus. The arrangement will be clear from 
Fig. 37 (l), (2). In Fig. 37 (1) the aorta passes in from the neck on the left. 
There is another membrane in this region not directly connected with the blood sinus, 
but which should be mentioned. This is a supporting membrane (sn”) which rises from the 
front of the cerebral commissure and passes to the dorsum of the head in the occipital 
region. This forms a pocket between itself and the sinus roof membrane (Sri). 
There are also some important relations on the ventral side of the notch. Besides the 
muscles 16 there is a smaller pair (muscles no. 17) which also pass from the dorsum in 
front of the cerebral commissure along with the muscles 16 to be inserted into the angles of 
the pharynx just ventral to the insertion of these. These smaller muscles serve still further to 
close in the flanks of the blood passage. Still another pair of muscles (no. 21) pass behind 
the commissure and are inserted to each side of the floor of the aorta where this enters the 
notch. Between this pair and nos. 16 and 17 there is, so far as I have been able to ascertain, 
a passage-way for blood directed laterally and downwards. The similarity of the arrange- 
ment to that given by Wigglesworth (1934) for Rhodnius will be evident. 
Where the aorta lies over the pharynx before reaching the knot it comes into close 
association with the retrocerebral nerve complex and is modified thereby. For further 
details see under the retrocerebral complex. 
The alary muscles (Fig. 36 (8)). Intimately associated with the heart and its accompanying 
pericardial cells are the alary muscles. These are small muscles ending in delicate fibrillar 
branches which form a network closing in a space, dorsal sinus, the network forming the 
dorsal diaphragm. The muscles arise from the cuticular hypoderm of the segments laterally 
and just external to the outer edge of the longitudinal series of muscles and pass under these 
and the large tracheal trunks. Their terminal fibrillae pass above and below the pericardial 
cells enclosing these between the two layers. There is one such muscle in AL;des aegypti to 
each pericardial cell and since these cells lie in groups of four pairs, two on each side of the 
intersegmental line the alary muscles have a similar distribution. There is only one pair at 
the anterior end of the first abdominal segment and two in the eighth segment. There are 
none connected with the aorta in the thorax. According to Jones (1954) the alary muscles 
maintain the heart wall taut and if cut the dilatation at the pulsating chamber disappears. 
They are not, however, concerned with the heart’s pulsation otherwise than to keep this 
organ under some control. According to Lebrun (1926) the alary fibres in Corethra are not 
muscular but of an elastic nature. In AL;des aegypti the fibrillae do not show up brilliantly 
when viewed by polarised light. This, however, would not seem to preclude their being of 
muscular nature since the heart itself is not vividly illuminated when so viewed. The same 
applies to a number of visceral muscles as compared with the brilliant effect with the usual 
systemic muscles. 
334 
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
The dorsal nephrocytes (Fig. 36 (I), (6), (7), (8)). In close relation with the heart are the 
pericardial cells, now commonly referred to as the dorsal nephrocytes, somewhat similar 
cells lying in the prothorax beneath the oesophagus being known as the ventral nephrocytes. 
The pericardial cells are large characteristic cells occurring in insects in close association 
with the heart. For a general review regarding their occurrence and characters see Hollande 
(1922). In the Diptera they have been described in the larva of Muscidae by Graber (1873) 
and by Kowalevsky (1889, 1892) ; in the larva of Anthomyidae by Keilin (19 17) ; in Myceto- 
philidae larva by Madwar (1937) ; in Chironomus larva by Graber (1873). In the mosquito 
they have been described in Culexpipiens larva by Wielowiejski (1886) and by Metalnikoff 
(1902) (also referred to by Kowalevsky (1889)); in Anopheles briefly by Imms (1908) ; more 
recently in the larva, pupa and imago of A. stephensi, C. fatigans and Ai;des aegypti by 
Rajindar Pal (1944) and in several species of Anopheles, in Culex pipiens and Agdes aegypti 
by Jones. 
According to Metalnikoff there are two large masses in the thorax situated ventrally 
anterior to the caeca, two large cells in the first abdominal segment and eight smaller cells 
arranged in four pairs in each abdominal segment from II to VIII. The large masses in the 
thorax refer to the ventral nephrocytes. The remaining description agrees with that given 
by Rajindar Pal in the three species noted. Jones, however, finds in several species of 
Anopheles examined, including A. stephensi, many more than the twenty-eight pairs 
described. He distinguishes three sizes of pericardial cells, namely, large (av. 18.5 ,U by 28* 1 ,u) ; 
medium (av. 12.3,~ by 18.0,~); and small (av. 8.2,~ by 15.7,~). The large occur principally 
in the region of the ostia, the medium and small all along the sides of the heart proper. 
Including the medium and small cells he finds in Anopheles as many as twenty-eight or 
more at each segment. 
In Aedes aegypti larva the number and arrangement of the pericardial cells with the 
exceptions noted below is as described by Metalnikoff and by Rajindar Pal. These are in 
groups of four pairs, two situated in the hinder part of the segment in front and two in the 
forward portion of the segment behind (Fig. 36 (1); 39 (9)). In segment I only one pair is 
present anteriorly (possibly in the metathorax as described by Rajindar Pal) and in the 
group VII-VIII there are two pairs only, both of which lie in the fore-part of the eighth 
segment. There are no cells in the hinder portion of the eighth segment, that is twenty-seven 
pairs in all. No cells that could be classed as small or medium cells have been seen in 
A. aegypti in the material examined by me, the intervening portions of heart between the 
groups of four pairs being quite free from any such type of cell. In mosquitoes taken in 
nature Rajindar Pal has found a certain small variation. In A. aegypti in the group VII-VIII 
there might be two, or three, pairs, two lying in the latter case in segment VII and one in 
VIII. In Anopheles there was some variation with season. It seems possible that conditions 
of culture might affect the numbers. 
The cells are large, oval in shape and measuring in the full-grown larva some 40,~ in 
length by 20,~ in transverse diameter. They usually have two, but sometimes three, nuclei 
arranged in the length of the cell. There is an outer denser cortical zone of cytoplasm and an 
inner more reticular cytoplasm, commonly with vacuoles and inclusions. They lie lateral to 
and somewhat ventral to the heart and between the large tracheal trunks. They are sur- 
rounded and enmeshed by the fine branching fibrillae of the alary muscles, but owing to 
the inconspicuous nature of these branchings in the larva they often appear in sections to 
lie more or less free in the pericardial sinus. As noted by Metalnikoff and subsequent 
335 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
authors they tend to take up carmine particles when this substance is introduced into the 
body by injection or feeding. They are now accepted as concerned in the taking up of 
colloidal particles and along with cells of a similar nature have been termed nephrocytes 
(Keilin, 1917). 
The ventral nephrocytes (Fig. 38 (1) PC”). In the mosquito larva the ventral nephrocytes are 
cells with a somewhat similar appearance to the pericardial cells and possessing the same 
power to take up carmine particles. In AnopheZes quadrimaculatus they lie, as described by 
Jones (1954), below the oesophagus in the median line over the connective linking the sub- 
oesophageal ganglion with the first thoracic ganglion and attached to the middle portion of 
the larval salivary gland (at the isthmus). They are connected to each other by thin filaments 
mn vtr 
Section 80 g. 6 
vtr vtr 
g. 7 .:&-_ 
:., asy OE. 5 * 
Figure 38. The corpora allata and the median nerve. 
1 Sagittal section near middle plane of head showing corpus allatum complex and other 
structures. 
2 The corpora allata and related structures of Ai;des aegypti. Reconstruction. 
3 Sagittal section through a corpus allatum complex. 
4 Coronal section through an intersegment showing ventral transverse muscle and median nerve. 
5 Two successive sections showing median nerve. 
Lettering : ao, aorta ; Cc, cerebral commissure ; ca, corpus allatum complex ; ca’, corpus allatum ; 
can, supporting cells of complex; 8.2, sub-oesophageal ganglion; g-3, first thoracic ganglion; 
g. 6,7, abdominal ganglia VI, VII ; mn, median nerve; nca, nerve to corpus allatum; Oe, oeso- 
phagus; P, pharynx; Pv, proventriculus; PC’“, ventral nephrocytes ; rcg, hypocerebral ganglion ; 
m, recurrent nerve; sn, aortic sinus ; t. 2, dorsal cephalic trachea; tc, cervical tracheal commissure; 
vtr, ventral transverse muscle. 
336 
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
of cytoplasm. They are not conspicuous in sections, but are best displayed in larvae fed on 
carmine in dissections, being attached to the salivary glands when these are dissected by 
the method of Jensen (1955). 
In AL;des aegypti the ventral nephrocytes form a group of from one to three large peri- 
cardial-like cells in the median line lying over the nerve connectives. 
THE BLOOD OR HAEMOLYMPH (Fig. 39(8)) 
The blood (haemolymph) of insects is a more or less colourless fluid. It forms a consider- 
able proportion of the total body substance of the mosquito larva and very considerable 
spaces occupied by the haemolymph occur in various parts of the body. The physical and 
chemical characters of the haemolymph in A. aegypti larva have been closely studied, 
notably by Wigglesworth (see under ‘Physiology’, p. 709). 
Contained in and in connection with the haemolymph are certain cellular elements, 
haemocytes. For a general review of the subject of the haemocytes of insect blood with 
plates showing the chief forms see Rooseboom (1937). * A bibliography is given by 
Rooseboom and by Wigglesworth (1942 a). 
All authors agree in recognising small reproductive forms (proleucocytes) with deeply 
staining nucleus, scanty cytoplasm and showing active karyokinesis. In Rooseboom’s 
plates these are shown in Calliphora measuring about 10,~ in diameter with nucleus 6,~. 
Type 2 of Rooseboom are much larger, measuring according to his figure up to as much as 
30,~ in diameter with nucleus of 6,~ and lightly staining. Among other forms described 
are oenocytoids. These have uniform acidophil cytoplasm resembling that of oenocytes, but 
are not (in Rhodnius) derived from these cells (Wigglesworth, 1942a). 
Insect haemocytes are for the most part sedentary, occurring especially in many insects 
lateral to the heart. They are commonly pear-shaped or fusiform with pointed ends. In 
the late larval stage phagocytes are commonly seen in numbers attached to muscles in 
process of removal and such may contain inclusions of muscle substance (sarcolytes). 
Haemocytes may accumulate to form phagocytic tissue of a permanent character (Cuenot 
(189 1,1893) ; Lange (1932), and previously Pause (19 19), describes in the terminal segments 
of Chironomus larva reticular membrane formed by phagocytic cells lining and enclosing 
fat-body). 
In Aedes aegypti larva blood cells, other than the small cells commonly seen accumu- 
lated about muscle fibres and other elements and presumably phagocytic, are not con- 
spicuous. The commonest forms of detached cell seen in the haemolymph are round or oval 
cells with relatively small nucleus and clear eosinophil cytoplasm measuring about 10~ 
in diameter (Fig. 39 (8)). These are found as single isolated cells in many positions in- 
cluding the pericardial space about the heart. The cells clustered about muscles are small 
spherical cells with round deeply staining nuclei and will be referred to later. 
OENOCYTES (Fig. 39 (4)4 (7), (9)) 
These are characteristic globular or polygonal cells with large central nucleus readily dis- 
tinguished from other tissue cells by their appearance and dark eosin staining cytoplasm. 
For a general review see Hollande (1914) and for a more recent account Wigglesworth 
(1933, 1942a). They have been described in the larva of Culex pz@ens by Wielowiejski 
* See also Kollmann (1908), Hollande (1909, 1911), Mutkowski (1924), Wigglesworth (1933, 1937, 1942a). 
22 337 CH 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
(1886) ; in Anopheles by Imms (1908) ; and very fully by Hosselet (1925) in Culex (Theo- 
baldia) annulata. In the advanced larva oenocytes occur in two forms, namely small and 
large. Small oenocytes measure about 20,~ in diameter. They occur characteristically set 
on the inner surface of the ventral parietal fat-body in segments 2-8. They may be quite 
numerous extending almost to the lateral border. They may also be found isolated or in 
scattered groups elsewhere. Large oenocytes resemble the small, but measure 50-60~ in 
diameter. They form groups of 5 or 6 closely packed cells on each side of abdominal 
segments l-8, lying in a pocket of the lateral parietal fat-body. In mounted preparations 
of the whole larva these lateral patches of dark-staining cells form a conspicuous and 
characteristic feature of the larval abdomen. 
According to Hosselet oenocytes are secretory cells. In an early stage they contain 
abundant chondriome, which disappears as secretion accumulates in the cytoplasm. 
Eventually they discharge their contents into the general body cavity. In the small oeno- 
cytes discharge of secretion is continuous through larval and pupal stages. With the large 
oenocytes accumulation of the products of secretion takes place at a slower rate and full 
development and discharge of secretion results only in the pupa. The complete disappear- 
ance of oenocytes from the adult shows that these cells are concerned only with meta- 
morphosis. They have been shown by Wigglesworth (1937) in Rhodnius not to initiate 
ecdysis, but to provide material for the building up of the new cuticle. 
In AL;des aegypti larva the lateral patches of about five large oenocytes on each side of 
abdominal segments I-VII form a striking feature (Fig. 39 (4), (9)). The cells lie close 
together in a roughly oval plaque in the mid-lateral line a little posterior to the middle of 
the segment and between lateral dorso-ventral muscles 4 and 5. The plaques lie usually in 
a recess on the inner aspect of the parietal layer of fat-body. The cells are very large, 
measuring up to 40 or 50,~ in diameter with large globular nuclei and uniform strongly 
- 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 Figure 39. Malpighian tubules, fat-body, oenocytes and haemocytes. 
Sliced preparation to show ventral parietal fat-body of thorax and first abdominal segment. 
Effect of staining with Sudan black. 
Thoracic visceral fat-body. a, cape-like prothoracic parietal fat-body. Ventral portion; 
b, median lobe of visceral fat-body lying on each side of the aorta and partly covering the 
corpora allata; c, extension of dorsal visceral fat-body lying over salivary gland; d, lateral 
extensions of ventral visceral fat-body. 
Transverse section of thorax of early fourth instar larva to show lobes of visceral fat-body. 
a and b as for no. 2. 
Transverse section of abdominal segment to show position of large and small oenocytes. 
Malpighian tubules. Unstained preparations. A, tubule of early fourth instar larva; B, the 
same of pre-ecdysis fourth instar larva. 
Transverse section of Malpighian tubule showing striated border. 
Oenocytes. A, large oenocytes; B, small oenocytes. Same magnification. 
Haemocytes. A, as seen in various situations; B, lying near heart. 
Schematic tangential section to show distribution of large and small oenocytes, also peri- 
cardial cells and the dorso-ventral segmental muscles. 
Lettering : ao, aorta; 0, gastric caecus; ca, corpus allatum; gb, imaginal bud of first leg; 
Zdv. 2-5, lateral dorso-ventral muscles. Zdv. 1 is present only in segment I; oe, large oenocytes; 
oe’, small oenocytes ; Pv, proventriculus; PC’, group of four pairs pericardial cells ; PC”, group of 
single pair ; PC”“, group of two pairs; sg, salivary gland; sp, spiracle; t, trachea (t. 32). 
338 
0.1 mm. 
I 2 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
eosinophil cytoplasm (Fig. 39 (7)). The only segment not showing the plaques is the 
eighth. There are no plaques in the thorax. 
Small oenocytes are another constant and conspicuous feature of larval structure. These 
lie embedded, or more strictly recessed, on the inner surface of the ventral parietal fat-body 
in all abdominal segments except the first and eighth (Fig. 39 (4), (9)). Usually there is an 
irregular group about the level of and ventral to the plaque of large oenocytes. Others are 
present more towards the posterior end of the segment. In appearance they closely 
resemble the large oenocytes, but measure only up to about 20~ in diameter. 
THE FAT-BODY (Fig. 39 (l)-(4)) 
This normally consists of layers or lobes composed of cells of more or less uniform 
character, 3040~ in diameter, whose cytoplasm is swollen with oil globules and watery 
vacuoles and may contain both reserve and secretory substances. As in insects in general 
(Weber, 1938) the fat-body in the mosquito larva consists of a layer immediately beneath 
and largely conterminous with the hypodermis, parietal layer, and of lobes lying around or 
between the internal organs, visceral layer. 
The disposition of the fat-body is best studied in the early stages of larval growth before 
excessive accumulation of fatty tissue and development of imaginal appendages obscures 
the arrangement. Even so, though in the mature larva there may appear to be little 
evidence of lobes from these becoming pressed together, their limits can still generally be 
made out. Further, the distribution has a definite relation to the metamerism and other 
features and so has some interest and importance. 
Study of the fat-body can often be facilitated by suitably staining fixed material with a 
fat-soluble stain, for example Sudan black. Dissections or sliced larvae may be over- 
stained in soudan black in 90 per cent alcohol, transferred to 90 per cent alcohol to 
decolorise if necessary and then to 70 per cent alcohol followed by 50 per cent alcohol, 
equal parts glycerine and 50 per cent alcohol and pure glycerine with final mounting in 
glycerine jelly. As oil-soluble stains are very rapidly removed in alcohol and clearing fluids, 
mounting in balsam is unsuitable. The fixative used is important. Good results have been 
given with Tower’s method. The lobes stand out very vividly (see Fig. 39 (1)). 
The arrangement of fat-body is seen in its simplest form in the abdomen where each 
segment has its own fat-body with a wide intersegmental gap, where in the living larva the 
pulsating heart and tracheal trunks are clearly displayed. The dorsal layer consists of a thin 
sheet lining the tergum and reaching anteriorly to the level of the spiracular cord and 
posteriorly to the end of the segment proper. It is this dorsal sheet, only about one cell in 
thickness, which is referred to by Wigglesworth (19423) as being very convenient for the 
study of reserve materials under the microscope using the living larva under a cover-glass. 
The ventral sheet is less uniform. It lines the ventral surface of the segment leaving a gap 
at the intersegment. It has a median ridge on which the ventral nerve cord rests. Laterally 
the two sheets are thickened, turned in and largely fused to form a thick mass of fat tissue 
occupying the side of the segment. This mass is grooved anteriorly by the spiracular cord 
passing from the spiracular punctae to the tracheal trunks and perforated by the dorso- 
ventral muscles of the segment. Occupying a pocket on the inner aspect of the lateral mass 
at about the middle of the segment or a little posterior to this is the characteristic group of 
large oenocytes. Lying on the inner surface of the ventral sheet on either side of the ventral 
340 
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
nerve cord are the small oenocytes. In the eighth segment the ventral layer is deficient 
posteriorly and the dorsal sheet does not pass the base line of the respiratory siphon. The 
anal segment has a separate sheet of parietal layer only on each side. Apart from lobules 
of the parietal layer the abdomen is devoid of any visceral layer. 
In the thorax the fat-body occurs both as parietal layer and extensions of this or separate 
lobes forming a visceral layer. As in the abdomen the parietal layer is divided corre- 
sponding to the three thoracic segments, though the gaps between are narrower and more 
bridged across than in the abdomen. Fenestrae at the insertion of muscles are also more 
conspicuous (Fig. 39 (1)). Laterally the dorsal and ventral sheets are linked up by exten- 
sions of fat-body passing internal to and between the genital buds of the legs and wings. 
A conspicuous feature is the continuous cape-like layer of prothoracic fat-body. This 
covers completely the anterior aspect of the thorax, sending lateral extensions over the 
genital buds of the first legs and abutting upon the rudiments of the pupal trumpets lying 
just dorsal and external to these (not shown in the figure). 
In addition to the thoracic dorsal and ventral parietal layers there are lobes of fat-body 
situated around and between the internal organs. The most important of these consist of 
dorsal and ventral masses filling the space anterior to the gastric caeca. The dorsal mass 
consists on each side of a lobe which has an inner fusiform portion (Fig. 39 (2), (3) b) 
abutting upon the aorta and partially covering over the corpora allata of its side. Externaly 
this lobe forms an extension lying over the salivary gland (c). It has been figured by 
Wigglesworth (19423) in his paper dealing with reserve materials in the mosquito larva. 
The ventral mass forms a pad at the level of the anterior end of the proventriculus resting 
upon the ventral nerve cord connectives (Fig. 38 (1)). From this extensions pass backwards 
on to the first thoracic ganglion and along the under side of the salivary gland (d). This 
lobe has also been figured by Wigglesworth. The arrangement is liable to considerable 
variation in details, though on the whole the general plan is adhered to. Lateral connecting 
strips joining the dorsal and ventral parietal sheets and junctions of these with the visceral 
lobes may resemble lobes. In the late larval stages also gross accumulation of fat tissue 
tends to obliterate details. 
The head is almost entirely devoid of fat-body and the spaces, which are considerable, are 
occupied by haemolymph. 
(g) THE RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX AND THE CORPORA ALLATA 
Under the name retrocerebral complex is included a rather complicated system of ganglia 
and nerves constituting what was formerly often termed the sympathetic or stomatogastric 
nervous system. Closely associated with this are certain bodies of a glandular nature the 
most important of which are the corpora allata or endocrine glands responsible for 
hormones concerned in metamorphosis (see ch. XXXI (b)). 
THE RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
The nervous structures composing the complex have in the past been very variously homo- 
logised and named by different authors. Recently an important comparative study, 
including these parts in the mosquito (Culex pipiens) has been made by Cazal (1948) with 
a suggested nomenclature. 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
According to Cazal the generalised scheme for the arrangement in insects is as follows. 
The recurrent nerve from the frontal ganglion passing backwards between the aorta and 
the oesophagus enlarges to form an oval ganglion, hypocerebral ganglion. From this there 
passes backwards a median, or two lateral, oesophageal nerves. These end at the fore part 
of the gut on each side in a ventricular or gastric ganglion. This constitutes the stomatogastric 
system. The cephalic neuro-endocrine or aortic system consists of a pair of glands, corpora 
paracardiaca (corpora cardiaca of many authors), situated laterally to the aorta, or in some 
forms fused in the middle line beneath the aorta, and two further glands lying posterior to 
these, the corpora allata. Nerves from the protocerebral lobes (an inner from the cerebral 
commissure and an outer from the protocerebral lobe), which may be fused, pass to the 
corpora paracardiaca and from these in turn nerves pass to the corpora allata. There are 
also some collateral nerves among which may be noted one from the nerve to the corpus 
paracardiacum going to the muscles of the tentorium or mastigator muscles; one from the 
corpus paracardiacum anastomosing with the maxillary nerve forming a ganglion under 
the oesophagus and others anastomosing with nerves in the prothorax. There is a nerve 
from the corpus paracardiacum to the hypocerebral ganglion and one from the corpus 
paracardiacum to the aorta. 
According to Cazal in Culex pipiens pupa the hypocerebral ganglion and the corpora 
paracardiaca are fused into one structure, namely a composite ganglion lying ventral to the 
aorta. This receives the recurrent pharyngeal nerve and from it proceed two lateral oeso- 
phageal nerves terminating in two ventricular ganglia, thus completing the normal stomato- 
gastric system. From the ganglion also arise on each side a nerve to the corpus allatum. 
Cazal notes, however, that in the larva the composite gland is very poorly developed, 
whilst the paracardiaca nerves are fused to the hypocerebral ganglion and end in some cells 
of doubtful nature (see also Possompes, 1946, 1948, who has recently described the above 
parts in Chironomus. A very clear account with figure is given by Imms in his fourth 
edition (1938), p. 65, embodying much of what is said above). 
In AL;des aegypti the parts are much as described by Cazal in Culex. The recurrent nerve 
passes backwards over the roof of the pharynx to the posterior notch in that organ. Here 
it turns sharply downwards, passing through a median groove in the cingulum muscle to 
enter the curious T-shaped body forming the first part of the floor of the aorta and which 
is thought to be the structure described by Imms in Anopheles larva as the ‘supporting 
collar’. Further back it enters a rather diffuse ganglionic structure on the ventral floor of 
the aorta. In some late larvae this appears to consist of a dorsal and a ventral mass. From 
the ventral mass arise two lateral nerves which at the level of the muscular neck diaphragm 
end in small collections of cells possibly representing the ventricular ganglia. The dorsal 
mass gives off stout nerves which pierce the diaphragm and pass to the corpora allata 
complexes. It has not been found possible to demonstrate the presence of the lateral nerves 
passing to the hypocerebral ganglion from the brain. 
THE CORPORA ALLATA 
The corpora allata in AZdes aegypti are included and form a part only of the structures 
which have been termed by Bodenstein (1945) the corpus allaturn complex. A very complete 
description has been given by Bodenstein, including the variation seen in a number of 
species and genera of mosquitoes, including A. aegypti, and the changes taking place in 
342 
THE RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
the pupa and adult. * The complex, which in the advanced larva is a conspicuous and easily 
identified structure, is situated just behind the neck on the tracheal commissure which 
connects the two dorsal cephalic tracheal trunks (Fig. 38 (2)). It consists on each side of 
the median line of a backwardly directed somewhat elongated conical structure composed 
of large cells with large oval nuclei containing, some distance down its length, a round or 
oval body composed of much smaller cells, the actual corpus allatum. The bodies en- 
closing the corpora allata are not only attached to but appear in continuity with the 
tracheal wall. The cells composing them are large with rather clear voluminous cytoplasm 
and large conspicuous oval nuclei. They are considered by recent authors (Possompes, 
Cazal) to be of the nature of pericardial cells. The cells composing the corpora allata are 
small with limited cytoplasm, clearly marked off from the surrounding larger cells. On 
their inner aspects a nerve enters each complex anteriorly and passes through their sub- 
stance to the neighbourhood of the corpora allata. As shown by Bodenstein, the outer cells 
disappear in the adult making the complex much less conspicuous. The characteristic small 
cells of the corpus allatum are, however, surrounded by a single layer of cells of inter- 
mediate size which have first appeared in the young pupa. The differences noted by 
Bodenstein in the species and genera of mosquitoes examined, including Anopheles, though 
appreciable are not great. 
In their figure showing the stomatogastric system in Chironomus Miall and Hammond, as 
does Possompes, indicate peculiar flange-like structures arising from the trachea and 
extending to the corpora allata. These flanges are clearly homologous with the supporting 
part of the corpora allata complex in mosquitoes, though in Chironomus they arise, not 
from the tracheal commissure, but from the dorsal cephalic tracheae just caudad of the 
commissure. As already noted, the cells of the supporting structure have been considered 
to be of the nature of pericardial cells. But very similar cells with large oval nuclei may be 
present where large new tracheal vessels are being initiated, for example, the large trachea 
that forms in connection with the abdominal spiracle of the pupa, or large new tracheae 
forming to supply the developing wing muscles of the adult. There would appear to be more 
than a merely casual relation of the complex with the tracheal system.? 
(h) THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
THE MALPIGHIAN TUBULES (Fig. 39 (5), (6)) 
The Malpighian tubules of Culex pipiens larva have been described by Metalnikoff (1902) ; 
Roubaud (1923); and de Boissezon (1930). Those of the larva of Anopheles maculipennis 
have been described by Nuttall and Shipley (1903) ; Imms (1907) ; Roubaud (1923) ; 
Missiroli (1925, 1927). Many points regarding their structure and physiology in Ai;des 
aegypti have been given by Wigglesworth (1933, 1942a). Studies on the Malpighian 
tubules of the same species have been made by Ramsay (195 1). 
* A paper in Russian by Mednikova (1952) also describes the endocrine organs, corpora allata and corpora 
cardiaca, of mosquitoes (see under references), but I have not seen any translation of this. 
i Of authors other than those mentioned who have dealt with the retrocerebral complex in the larvae of related 
forms to mosquitoes may be noted; Dogiel (1877, who in Corethra first described the corpora allata), Miall and 
Hammond (1900, Chironomus), Holmgren (1904, Chironomus), Nabert (19 13, Tipulid), Frew, ( 1923, Forcipomyia), 
Selke (1936, Tipulid), Madwar (1937, Mycetophiliidae), Burtt (1937, Chironomus and Tipulid), Hanstrom (1942, 
Diptera), Thomsen (1943, Cdiphoru, with short general review in English), Arve and Gabe (1947, Chironomus), 
Zee and Pai (1944, Chironomus). 
343 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
The tubules of A. aegypti have the same general anatomical characters as described in 
other mosquitoes. Both in the larva and in the imago they are five in number, a peculiarity 
of Culicidae shared only by Psychoda, Ptychopters and Blepharocidae (Pentanephridia of 
Muller, 188 1). They are best studied dissected out and examined fresh in Ringer’s solution 
or after special fixation on a cover-glass. As noted by Wigglesworth (1931) in connection 
with Rhodnius they are not usually well fixed in sections. The striated border, as also noted 
by Wigglesworth, Zoc. cit., is well shown by dark-ground illurn.ination. For observing the 
course of the tubules they can be examined in transparent mounted larvae or better in fixed 
material, the detached abdomen being brought through alcohol and glycerine equal parts 
to glycerine. The soft cuticle is then readily removed, leaving the hardened tubes and gut in 
their natural position. 
The tubules open into the intestine just behind the characteristic cells of the mid-gut 
into a slight dilatation of the intestine corresponding to the pyloric ampulla of the imago, 
one dorsal, dorsal tubule, and two on each side, one dorsal and one ventral, that is a dorso- 
lateral and a ventro-lateral pair. From their point of entry, which is at about the posterior 
end of the fifth segment, each tube loops forward to about the anterior border of the 
segment and, bending backwards, so continues to terminate in a blind end in the eighth 
segment. In the larva, after the initial forward loop, the course of the tubules is fairly 
direct. The two ventro-lateral tubules extend to the end of the segment, the others stopping 
slightly short of this. Though only loosely held in place by tracheal branches the different 
tubules have a more or less constant position. The ventro-lateral pair pass back on each 
side in a wavy fashion ventral to the intestine to terminate with their blind ends lying close 
together near the middle line or more or less separated. The dorso-lateral pair lie dorsal to 
the intestine and about half-way along their course come together in the middle line, 
afterwards diverging to lie along each side of the sausage-shaped colon (Fig. 25 (1)). 
Sometimes they cross each other and come to lie on opposite sides of the colon to their 
origin. The dorsal tubule in its terminal portion usually comes to lie alongside one or other 
of the dorso-lateral pair, usually the left. 
In the early stages, up to the early fourth instar, the tubules are narrow, of even thickness 
throughout and translucent. During the fourth instar the cells of the tubules become so 
charged with granules that the tubules are considerably swollen, opaque and milky white. 
The portion of tubule forming the ascending part of the anterior loop differs somewhat 
from the rest of the tubule, being somewhat narrower and remaining relatively free from 
granular deposit so that it is more difficult to see in the whole mounted larva when the 
rest of the tubule, being opaque and white, stands out markedly. 
In structure each tubule consists of an outer thin membranous coat devoid of muscle 
within which are large characteristic cells with a striated border surrounding a relatively 
narrow lumen. The cells are aligned along the tubule on opposite sides alternately, giving 
to the tubule a somewhat zigzag effect. Each cell occupies the greater part of the circum- 
ference of the tube, bulging in its thicker central portion in which the nucleus lies into the 
lumen and thinning out towards its edges. They may be visualised as more or less square, 
wrapped round the tube with two opposite angles meeting, or nearly meeting, on the 
opposite side to the nucleus. The adjoining cells being oppositely placed make good the 
deficiency where the narrow points meet. There are well-marked lines of demarcation 
between adjoining cells, which, when the cells are opaque with granules, appear as clear 
transparent lines. The cytoplasm is uniform in character, finely granular or loaded with 
344 
THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
coarse granules depending on circumstances affecting excretion. The nucleus is large, clear 
and spherical and situated centrally in the cell. The lumen in the early larval stages is fairly 
wide and clearly outlined. As a result of the cells projecting on alternate sides of the tube it 
has usually a wavy course. When the cells are heavily loaded with granules it tends to be 
narrow and ill-defined unless distended with fluid or solid matter. The presence of solid 
secretion in the lumen is commonly described, usually associated with cells transparent and 
clear from granular matter. This would appear to depend to some extent at least upon 
conditions affecting the larva. Wigglesworth (1933) notes that if larvae are grown in 
isotonic or slightly hypertonic salt the lumen of the Malpighian tubules becomes clogged 
with granules. After transfer to fresh water the tubules in a few minutes are clear and 
transparent. A similar filling of the lumen by solid excretory matter is described by 
Roubaud in larvae grown under crowded conditions. 
In that portion of the tubule forming the proximal limb of the forward loop which was 
noted as differing somewhat in character from the remainder of the tubule the cells are 
smaller and usually more flattened. Also, as noted by Imms, the line of demarcation between 
the cells is little apparent. 
An important point is the nature of the striated border. A well-marked and defined 
striated border can usually be made out except when the cells are heavily loaded with 
granules. As seen under dark-ground illumination the border appears as a dark clear 
zone about 1.0~ in width situated next to the more granular cytoplasm and above this, 
bordering the lumen, is a brightly illuminated line about 2.0~ in width. In the early larval 
stages this clearly defined line can be traced throughout the whole lumen including that in 
the proximal part of the forward loop. In the larva of Anopheles maculipennis Imms also 
figures the ascending portion of the forward loop as being lined by a uniform narrow layer 
which has all the appearance of being striated border of the honeycomb type. The question 
to what extent the tubules in ACdes aegypti show striated border of the brush type is later 
discussed under the excretory system of the imago. 
As shown by Wigglesworth the Malpighian tubules of the larva play an important role 
in the maintenance of the osmotic control of the larval haemolymph (see under ‘ Physiology ‘, 
p. 709 and also further remarks regarding the Malpighian tubules and their functions 
given when discussing the excretory system of the imago). 
Unlike the mid-gut the epithelium of the Malpighian tubules is not replaced during 
metamorphosis. , 
OTHER TISSUES CONCERNED IN EXCRETION 
Besides the Malpighian tubules certain other tissues also play a part in excretion usually by 
the storage of waste products. In the mosquito the only tissues of importance in this 
respect are the cells of the fat-body and the nephrocytes, including the ventral nephrocytes 
and the pericardial cells. For information regarding these structures in the larva see 
appropriate headings in the section dealing with the circulatory system and associated 
tissues. 
(i) THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
Certain stages in the development of the reproductive system take place in the body cavity 
and hypoderm of the larva. There are no external indications of these such as are present 
in the pupa. These changes have been described in some detail by Christophers (1922, 1923) 
345 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
and reference to some of the structures has been given by Imms (1908). In a recent 
publication Abul-Nasr (1950) has studied the development of the reproductive system in 
three representative species of the Nematocera, including Chironomus dorsalis, and as a 
result has employed a common nomenclature for the parts based on the homologies as 
ascertained by the observed development. The stages present in the mosquito larva are very 
similar to those described by Abul-Nasr in Chironomus and it will be convenient to use 
Nasr’s nomenclature. Before describing the appearances seen in the larva of Ai;des aegypti 
it will facilitate matters to describe very briefly and in outline the general plan on which 
this nomenclature is based. 
Following Abul-Nasr the organs of generation include (a) the primary reproductive 
system consisting of the sexual glands or gonads with associated mesodermal structures, 
(b) the secondary reproductive system comprising those parts of ectodermal origin other 
than the segmental parts, and (c) modified segmental parts including the genital appendages. 
Little need be said regarding the gonads and mesodermal structures. These are respec- 
tively in the female and male the ovaries and the testes with their terminaljilaments, when 
present, and their mesodermal strands. According to Abul-Nasr the last-mentioned 
structures in Chironomus in both sexes are branched, one branch proceeding to the seventh 
segment and the other to the anterior border of the ninth sternite. The branch which is 
thickest and eventually develops depends on the sex, namely the strand to the seventh 
segment in the female and that to the ninth segment in the male, the other strand dis- 
appearing before completion of larval life. 
The secondary systems differ in the two sexes. In the female the structures are derived 
chiefly from invaginations at the posterior border of the eighth sternite. Two imaginal 
buds appear first as separate disks of hypodermal thickening on each side of the mid- 
ventral line and later coalesce to form the rudiment of the vagina. On the dorsal surface of 
each of these buds there arise the spermathecal rudiments. Later a median invagination 
between and slightly anterior to those forming the spermathecal rudiments forms the 
rudiment of the common oviduct. At a later stage an invagination arising from a thickening 
on the dorsal wall of the vagina forms the vaginal apodeme rudiment. Besides these de- 
velopments at the posterior border of the eighth segment there is formed in the female a 
further pair of hypodermal buds on each side of the median line at the base of the ninth 
segment, which later join and form the rudiment of the caecus. Later these two sets of 
rudiments, those on the eighth and those on the ninth segment, are brought together so 
that they open into a common cavity, the atrium. This latter is a development from the 
intersegmental membrane between the eighth and ninth segments, enclosed as these 
segments are brought into closer apposition. It develops certain sclerotisations which will 
be referred to later when describing the parts in the adult. Meanwhile the common oviduct 
invagination progresses forwards and links up at the posterior border of the seventh 
segment with the mesodermal strands either still as an undivided median structure or after 
bifurcation, thus giving rise to the oviduct rudiments. The oviducts, right and left, may in 
different species be variously formed, therefore, from mesodermal or ectodermal elements, 
but are liable to eventual replacement of the former by the latter due to the ectodermal 
tissues replacing or creeping over the mesodermal. The segmental modifications need not 
here be dealt with as they will be fully described later when dealing with the pupal and 
adult parts. It is only necessary to say that in the female sex there are no genital 
appendages. 
346 
THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
In the male the first indications of the reproductive system other than the mesodermic 
elements appear as hypodermal disks on each side of the middle line at the base of the 
ninth sternite ventrally. These develop into conspicuous imaginal buds which are the 
rudiments of the future gonocoxites (male forceps, claspers or coxites). Later two further 
invaginations appear at the bases of the gonocoxite rudiments which are the rudiments 
of the ejaculatory ducts. From each of the ejaculatory duct rudiments there develops 
an outgrowth which will eventually link up with the mesodermal strand of its side. The 
ejaculatory duct rudiments and their outgrowths, together with the mesodermal strands, will 
eventually develop into the vesiculae seminales, vas deferens and other structures which 
need not concern us for the present. There now occurs a still further and independent 
invagination which carries forwards with it the ejaculatory duct rudiments and will eventu- 
ally form the terminal undivided median seminal passage. This is termed by Abul-Nasr the 
penis tube. The name is a little apt to cause some confusion, due to other terms made use of 
in connection with the extremely complicated reproductive organs in some of the Nemato- 
cera, for example in the Tipulidae. For the present it will be sufficient to note that it 
commonly happens that the penis tube with the tissue surrounding it is excavated by a 
circumferential fissure to form a projecting organ, thepenis, and that this may lie within the 
hollow formed by the encircling fissure which constitutes the genital cavity. These later 
changes need not be further pursued for the present. It is necessary, however, to say 
something regarding the genital appendages in the male. Internal to the gonocoxite rudi- 
ments, arising independently or as lobes divided from the gonocoxite rudiments, are the 
paramere lobes of Pruthi (1925). In many forms these further divide into an outer pair of 
lobes, theparameres, and an inner pair which may form or take part in the formation of the 
intromittent organ. 
With this resume of the nature of the structures present in the two sexes the repro- 
ductive system as present in the larval stage in Aedes aegypti can be described in due 
perspective. 
THE MALE SYSTEM 
The testes are situated in the sixth abdominal segment where they are recognisable in 
sections at least as early as the second instar and quite conspicuous in the third. In the 
fourth instar they form stout sausage-shaped structures measuring about 0.3 mm. in 
length, that is nearly the length of the segment. They lie on each side of the segment close 
to the lateral parietal wall and ventral and external to the large tracheal trunks. Each is 
closely invested by a special coat of fat-body, which, however, is not pigmented or other- 
wise different from other lobes of this tissue. The anterior extremity is narrowed, but is not 
continued into a terminal filament as is that of the ovary. Distally there is a well-marked 
mesodermal strand which can be traced to the ventral aspect of the posterior border of the 
seventh segment. I have not been able to demonstrate in A. aegypti larva any strand 
extending to the ninth sternite. Imms, too, in describing the larval testis in Anopheles, 
mentions only a strand passing to the seventh segment. Nor, in the larva, does develop- 
ment appear to proceed as far as the linking up of the strands with the ejaculatory duct 
rudiments. In structure the testis in the fourth instar has a very characteristic appearance, 
being largely composed of transverse layers of spermatogonia and spermatocytes from two 
to more cells in thickness as distinct from the polygonal loculi in many insects. There is a 
membranous coat with nuclei within which the contained spermatocytes lie apparently 
347 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
without special support. The apical portion, as does also the very young organ, consists of 
small round cells with dark nuclei. There does not appear to be any large ‘apical cell’ as 
present in some insects (Snodgrass, 1935, p. 571). Following upon the apical portion are 
layers of different stages in the formation of spermatozoa. No fully developed spermatozoa 
have been seen in the larval stage. 
The secondary reproductive system in the male is entirely confined to structures origi- 
nating at the base of the anal segment. Already in the third instar are present imaginal 
buds in the position of the imaginal buds of the gonocoxites in the fourth instar. These 
appear widely separated on either side of the ninth segment close to its anterior border on 
the ventral aspect. They are very conspicuous and may enable the sex of a larva to be 
determined even in a fresh specimen. During the fourth instar these buds develop into 
conical lobes which are clearly the future gonocoxites. These come to occupy the whole 
length of the anal segment, their apices reaching as far as the ventral fan. Owing to the 
thickening of the hypoderm over a considerable area at the base of the segment the gono- 
coxite rudiments when extruded are linked together basally by thickened hypoderm which 
will eventually form the ninth sternite in the pupa and adult (Fig. 40 (3)-(5)). 
Lying basal and internal to the gonocoxite rudiments after these have evaginated are two 
conspicuous more or less globular masses with central cavities. Each of these is extended 
outwards as a fine projection (Fig. 40 (5)). There can be no doubt, from the resemblance of 
these structures to the description and figures of Abul-Nasr for Chironomus, that they are 
the ejaculatory duct rudiments as described by that author. They first appear in the late 
third instar as thickenings on the gonocoxite imaginal buds. Their cavities are continued 
into the extensions which arise from them and will become the vasa deferentia. These 
extensions have not been traced in the larva to the mesodermal strands and my previous 
statement that they were the swollen ends of the strands (Christophers, 1922) requires 
correction. Late in the fourth instar the position where the invagination of the penis tube 
will take place is very clearly shown as a dimple in the middle line between the bases of the 
gonocoxite rudiments (Fig. 40 (5) pi’). At this stage also the commencing fissure that will 
divide off the paramere lobes from the gonocoxites makes its appearance. Later changes 
are described under the pupa and discussed when dealing with the reproductive system in 
the adult. 
Figure 40. Male reproductive system. 
Showing position of male gonads and secondary reproductive system. Fourth instar 
larva. 
Longitudinal section of male gonad. 
Anal segment of late third instar larva, showing gonocoxite genital buds not everted and 
beginning formation of the ejaculatory duct rudiments. 
The same in an early fourth instar larva, showing everted gonocoxite rudiments and appearance 
of rudiments of vas deferens on ejaculatory duct rudiments. 
The same in a late stage fourth instar larva. The vas deferens rudiments have elongated and 
position of penis cavity invagination indicated. 
Lettering: A, anal lobe; gcx.y, rudiment of gonocoxite; ejd.r, rudiment of ejaculatory duct; 
ft, parietal fat-body of segment; gm, spermatogonia; m.go, male gonad; mst, mesodermal strand; 
pi’, site of penis invagination; spc, layers of developing spermatocytes; t.ft, layer of fat-body 
surrounding the male gonad; vd.r, rudiment of vas deferens. 
348 
A gcx.r 
I o-1 mm. 3 
vd.r 
Figure 40 o-1 mm. 5 
349 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
THE FEMALE SYSTEM (Fig.41) 
The female rudiments in A&&s aegypti conform to the usual type of development in the 
Nematocera as described by Abul-Nasr. The ovaries are situated in the sixth abdominal 
segment, being already present in the third instar. In the fourth instar they are rather 
elongate structures of about the length of a segment and extend somewhat into the fifth 
segment. They are not, as are the testes, provided with a special coating of fat-body. They 
possess an outer nucleated containing membrane and indications in the arrangement of the 
Figure 41. Female reproductive system. . ‘.. . 
1 O-lmm. 1 3 
Showing position of gonads and secondary reproductive system of female. Fourth instar larva. 
Sagittal section, showing hypodermal thickenings and invaginations of developing common 
oviduct, spermathecae and caecus. 
Ventral view of the same parts. Reconstruction. a, opening of duct of median spermathecal 
rudiment into the vaginal rudiment. b, opening of the conjoined ducts of the lateral 
spermathecae. 
Transverse section across the common oviduct rudiment and the rudiments of the median 
and lateral spermathecae. 
Section of ovary in young larva, showing early formation of follicles and nucleated peritoneal 
sheath of ovary. 
Lettering: at.r, area becoming atrium on closing in of parts; cod.r, common oviduct rudiment; 
cs.r, caecus rudiment; f.go, female gonad; foZ.c, follicular cells; ft, lobe of fat-body; g, ganglion 
of eighth abdominal segment; mst, mesodermal strand; oog, oogonium; pts, nucleated peritoneal 
sheath; sp’, spiracular plaque on tracheal trunk; spmr, spermathecal rudiments; tf, terminal 
filament ; vg.r, vaginal rudiment. 
350 
THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
cells throughout their substance of early follicle formation (Fig. 41 (5)). A conspicuous 
terminal filament is present, passing forwards from the apex of the organ nearly to the 
anterior border of the fifth segment in the neighbourhood of the tracheal plaque of that 
segment where it ends on the surface of the tracheal trunk. A well-marked mesodermal 
strand extends from the posterior extremity to the hinder border of the seventh segment. 
The secondary reproductive system consists of the rudiments of the caecus on the ventral 
aspect of the base of the anal segment (ninth sternite) and those of the common oviduct 
and spermathecae at the posterior border of the eighth segment. The caecus rudiment is 
already present in the third instar, where, as also early in the fourth instar, it consists of 
two areas of thickened hypoderm with a central depression in each. Later these join to 
form a single centrally situated rudiment with a central dimple, in which condition it 
remains throughout the larval period. 
The rudiments of the common oviduct and spermathecae are later in appearing. In the 
early fourth instar there appear on the eighth segment towards its posterior ventral border, 
and widely separated, two small hypodermal thickenings. These later extend and fuse, 
forming a median rudiment consisting of a common oviduct rudiment and three sperma- 
thecal rudiments. The common oviduct rudiment has a wide posterior opening and a 
rapidly advancing invagination which at the time of full larval development has extended 
to the hinder border of the seventh segment. The spermathecal rudiments are three in 
number. They lie one on each side and one in the middle behind the common oviduct 
rudiment, the ducts from their cavities joining and entering the cavity of the oviduct rudi- 
ment some little distance from its opening. From the resemblance of the early appearance 
of the two widely separated hypodermal disks to the condition described by Abul-Nasr in 
Chironomus and other features in the development, it is almost certain that the portion of 
invagination distal to the entry of the ducts is really a separate rudiment, namely that of the 
vagina. This would be formed by the junction of the original two hypodermal disks coming 
together as described in Chironomus. Unfortunately these early changes have not been 
sufficiently observed in detail to enable this to be definitely stated. The resemblance, how- 
ever, of the development in the two forms leaves little doubt of the fact that development 
in the mosquito and Chironomus is closely similar. In Chironomus there are two sperma- 
thecae, those corresponding to the lateral rudiments in the mosquito. The median sperma- 
theta of the mosquito is therefore not represented, unless its homology be the vaginal 
apodeme as figured by Abul-Nasr. 
A point that should be mentioned is that in the later stages the lateral thickenings of the 
area on the eighth sternite become much thickened and form projecting ridges. They 
represent the beginning of the process by which the parts on the eighth and ninth sternites 
are brought together to form the atrium. 
REFERENCES 
(d-e) THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
BUGNION, E. and POPOFF, N. (1914). Les yeux des insectes nocturnes. Arch. Anat. Microsc. 16, 
26 l-304. 
CONSTANTINEANU, M. J. (1930). Der Aufbau der Sehorgane bei den in Stisswasser lebenden 
Dipterenlarven und bei Puppen und Imagines von Culex. Zool. Jahrb., Anat. 52, 251-346. 
DEMOLL, R. (1917). Die Sinnesorgane der Arthropoden, ihr Bau und ihre Funktion. Braunschweig. 
3s 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
GRABER, V. (1882). Die chordotonalen Sinnesorgane und das Gehiir der Insekten. Arch. wiss. 
Anat. 20, 506-640; 21, 65-145. 
GRENACHER, H. (1879). Untersuchungen iiber das Sehorgan der Arthropoden. G8ttingen. 
HICKSON, S. J. (1885). The eye and optic tract of insects. Quart. J. Mcr. Sci. 25, 215-51. 
IMMS, A. D. (1908). On the larval and pupal stages of Anophelesmaculipennis Meigen. Parasitology, 
1, 103-32. 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). A General Textbook of Entomology. Methuen and Co., London. 
JOHANSEN, 0. A. (1893). Die Entwicklung des Imagoauges von Vanessa urticae. Zool. Jahrb., 
Anat. 6, 446-80. 
RADL, E. (1905). Uber das Gehijr der Insekten. BioZ. ZbZ. 25, 1-5. 
REDIKORZEW, W. (1900). Untersuchungen i.iber den Bau der Ocellen der Insekten. 2. wiss. ZooZ. 
68, 58 l-624. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). See references in ch. XIII (a). 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Methuen and Co., London 
(see also many later editions). 
ZAVREL, J. (1907). Die Augen einiger Dipterenlarven und Puppen. ZooZ. Anz. 31, 247-55. 
(f) THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM AND ASSOCIATED TISSUES 
CUENOT, L. (1891). l%ude sur le sang et les glandes lymphatiques dans la skrie animale. Arch. 
ZooZ. exp. (2) 9, 365-99. 
CUENOT, L. (1893). etudes physiologiques sur les Orthoptkres. Arch. BioZ. 14, 293-341. 
DOGIEL, J. (1877). Anatomie und Physiologie des Herzens der Larve von Corethra punctipennis. 
Mein. Acad. Sci. St-Pe’tersb. (7), 24, no. 10. 
GRABER, V. (1873). Ueber den propulsatorischen Apparat der Insekten. Arch. mikr. Anat. 9, 
129-96. 
GRABER, V. (1876). Ueber den pulsierenden Bauchsinus der Insekten. Arch. mikr. Anat. 12, 
575-82. 
HOLLANDE, A. C. (1909). Contribution a 1’Ctude du sang des Colt?opt&res. Arch. ZooZ. exp. gen. 
(5), 2, 271-94. 
HOLLANDE, A. C. (1911). etude histologique cornparke du sang des insectes etc. Arch. ZooZ. exp. 
gen. (5), 6, 283-323. 
HOLLANDE, A. C. (1914). Oenocytes (review and orig.). Arch. Anat. Micr. 16, l-64. 
HOLLANDE, A. C. (1922). La cellule pkricardiale des insectes. Arch. Anat. Micr. 18, 85-307. 
HOLMGREN, W. (1904). Zur Morphologie des Insektenkopfes. II. Zum metameren Aufbau des 
Kopfes der Chironomus Larve. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 76, 439-77. 
HOSSELET, C. (1925). Les oenocytes de CuZex annulatus et l’&ude de leur chondriome au tours de 
la s&r&ion. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 180, 399-401. 
HURST, C. M. (1890). See references in ch. XIII (b). 
IMMS, A. D. (1908). See section (d-e). 
JENSEN, D. V. (1955). Method for dissecting salivary glands in mosquito larvae and pupae. 
Mosquito News, 15, 215-16. 
JONES, J. C. (1952). Prothoracic aortic sinuses in Anopheles, CuZex and Ai;des. Proc. Ent. Sot. 
Wash. 54, 244-6. 
JONES, J. C. (1953). On the heart in relation to circulation of haemocytes in insects. Ann. Ent. 
Sot. Amer. 46, 366-72. 
JONES, J. C. (1954). The heart and associated tissues of Anopheles quadrimaculatus Say (Diptera : 
Culicidae). J. Morph. 94, 71-124. 
KEILIN, D. (1917). Recherches sur les Anthomyides & larve carnivores. Parasitology, 9, 325-450. 
KOLLMANN, M. (1908). Recherches sur les leucocytes et le tissu lymphoide des invertebrks. 
Ann. Sot. Nat. ZooZ. (9), 8, l-238. 
KOWALEVSKY, A. (1889). Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Excretionsorgane. BioZ. ZbZ. 9, 33-47, 
65-76, 127-8. 
KOWALEVSKY, A. (1892). Sur les organes excr&eurs chez les Arthropodes terrestres. Congr. 
Internat. Zool., Moscow, Part 1, 187-234. 
352 
REFERENCES 
LANGE, H. H. (1932). Die Phagocytose bei Chironomiden. Z. Zellforsch. 16, 753-805. 
LEBRUN, H. (1926). L’appareil circulatoire de Corethra plumicornis. CeZZuZe, 37, 183-200. 
MADWAR, S. (1937). Biology and morphology of the immature stages of Mycetophilidae (Diptera: 
Nematocera). Phil. Trans. R. Sot. B, 227, l-110. 
METALNIKOFF, S. (1902). Beitrage zur Anatomie und Physiologie der Mtickenlarve. Bull. Acad. 
Imp. Sci. St-Petersb. 17, 49-58. 
MUTTKOWSKI, R. A. (1924). Studies on the blood of insects. II. The structural elements of the 
blood. Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Sot. 19, 4-19. 
PAUSE, J. (19 19). Beitrag zur Biologie und Physiologie der Larve von Chironomus gregarius. ZooZ. 
Jahrb., Physiol. 36, 339-452. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1944). Nephrocytes in some Culicidae. Diptera. Ind. J. Ent. 6, 143-8. 
RASCHKE, E. W. (1887). See references in ch. XIII (a). 
ROOSEBOOM, M. (1937). Contribution a l’etude de la cytologic du sang de certaines insectes etc. 
Arch. Neerl. ZooZ. 2, 432-551. 
TOWER, W. L. (1902). Observations on the structure of the exuvial glands and the formation of 
the exuvial fluid in insects. ZooZ. Anz. 25, 466-72. 
TZONIS, K. (1936). Beitrag zur Kenntnis des Herzens der Corethra plumicornis Larve (Chaoborus 
crystallinus Geer.). ZooZ. Anz. 116, 81-90. 
WEBER, H. (1938). Grundriss der Insektenkunde. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
WIELOWIEJSKI, H. R. (1886). Uber das Blutgewebe der Insekten. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 43, 512-36. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933). Physiology of the cuticle and of ecdysis in Rhodnius prolixus 
(Triatomidae, Hemiptera), with special reference to the function of the oenocytes and of the 
dermal glands. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 76, 269-318. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1934). The physiology of ecdysis in Rhodnius prolixus. II. Factors con- 
trolling moulting and metamorphosis. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 77, 191-222. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1937). Wound healing in an insect (Rhodnius prolixus, Hemiptera). 
J. Exp. BioZ. 14, 364-81. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942a). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2. London. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942b). The storage of protein, fat, glycogen and uric acid in the fat-body 
and other tissues of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. BioZ. 19, 56-77. 
(g) THE RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX AND CORPORA ALLATA 
ARVY, L. and GABE, M. (1947). Contribution a I’etude cytologique et histochimique des forma- 
tions endocrines retro-cerebrales de la farve de Chironomus plumosus L. Rev. Canad. BioZ. 
6, 777-96. 
BODENSTEIN, D. (1945). The corpora allata of mosquitoes. 44th Rep. Connect. State Entom. 
Connect. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 488, 396405. 
BURTT, E. T. (1937). On the corpora allata of dipterous insects. Proc. R. Sot. B, 124, 
13-23. 
CAZAL, P. (1948). Les glandes endocrines retrocerebrales des insectes (8tude morphologique). 
Bull. biol. Suppl. 32. 
DOGIEL, J. (1877). See under section (f). 
FREW, J. G. H. (1923). On the larval and pupal stages of Forcipomyia piceus. Ann. AppZ. BioZ. 
10, 409-41. 
HANSTROM, B. (1942). Die corpora cardiaca und corpora allata der Insekten. Biolog. generalis, 
15,485-531. 
HOLMGREN, N. (1904). See under section (f). 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). See under sections (d)-(e). 
MADWAR, S. (1937). See under section (f). 
MEDNIKOVA, M. V. (1952). The endocrine glands, corpora allata and corpora cardiaca of 
mosquitoes (Fam. Culicidae). (In Russian.) ZooZ. Zhurnal, 31, 676-85. 
MIALL, L. C. and HAMMOND, A. P. (1900). The Structure and Life History of the Harlequin FZy 
(Chironomus). Clarendon Press, London. 
NABERT, A. (1913). Die corpora allata der Insekten. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 104, 181-358. 
23 353 CH 
LARVAL STRUCTURE 
POSSOMPES, B. (1946). Les glandes endocrines post-cerebrales des Dip&es. I. Etudes chez la larve 
de Chironomus plumosus L. Bull. Sot. Zool. France, 71, 99-109. 
POSSOMPES, B. (1948). Les corpora cardiaca de la larve de Chironomusplumosus L. Bull. Sot. zool. 
Fr. 73, 202-6. 
SELLKE, K. (1936). Biologische und morphologische Studien an schadlichen Wiesenschnaken 
(Tipulidae: Dipt.). Z. wiss. Zool. 148, 465-555. 
THOMSEN, E. (1943). An experimental and anatomical study of the corpus allatum in the blow-fly, 
Calliphora erythrocephala Meig. Vidensk. Medd. dansk naturh. Foren. Kbh. 106, 320-405. 
THOMSEN, E. (1952). Functional significance of the neurosecretory brain cells and the corpus 
cardiacurn in the female blow-fly, Calliphora erythrocephala Meig. J. Exp. Biol. 29, 137-72. 
ZEE, H. C. and PAI, S. (1944). Corpus allatum and corpus cardiacurn in Chironomus sp. Amer. 
Nat. 78, 472-7. 
(h) THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1930). Contributions h l’etude de la biologie et de la histophysiologie de Culex 
pipiens. Arch. Zool. Exp. Gen. 70, 281-431. 
IMMS, A. D. (1907). On the larval and pupal stages of Anopheles maculipennis Meigen. J. Hyg., 
Camb. 7, 291-316. 
METALNIKOFF, S. (1902). See under section (f). 
MISSIROLI, A. (1925). I tubuli de1 Malpighii nell’ Anopheles claviger. Ann. Igiene, 35, 113-22. 
MISSIROLI, A. (1927). I tubuli de1 Malpighii nell’ Anopheles claviger. Riv. di Malarial. 7, l-7. 
MULLER, F. (1881). Wissenschaftliche Mitteilungen. I. Verwandlung und Verwandtschaft der 
Blepharociden. Zool. Anz. 4, 499-502. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1903). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., Camb. 3, 
166-215. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (195 1). Osmotic regulation in mosquito larvae. The role of the Malpighian tubules. 
J. Exp. Biol. 28, 62-73. 
ROUBAUD, E. (1923). Les d&harmonies de la fonction r&ale et leur consequences biologiques 
chez les moustiques. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 27, 627-79. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1931). The physiology of excretion in a blood-sucking insect, Rhodnius 
prolixus (Hemiptera, Reduviidae). II. Anatomy and histology of the excretory system. 
J. Exp. Biol. 8, 428-42. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933). The adaptation of mosquito larvae to salt water. J. Exp. Biol. 10, 
27-37. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942a). See under section (j’). 
(i) THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
ABUL-NASR, S. E. (1950). Structure and development of the reproductive system of some species 
of Nematocera (Diptera: Nematocera). Phil. Trans. B, 234, 339-96. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1922). The development and structure of the terminal abdominal segments 
and hypopygium of the mosquito with observations on the homologies of the terminal 
segments of the larva. Znd. J. Med. Res. 10, 530-72. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1923). The structure and development of the female genital organs and 
hypopygium of the mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 698-719. 
IMMS, A. D. (1908). See under section (f). 
PRUTHI, H. SINGH (1925). Development of the male genitalia in Homoptera and preliminary 
remarks on the nature of these organs in other insects. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 69, 59-96. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). See references in ch. XIII (a). 
354 
XV 
THE PUPA 
(a) GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION (Fig.42) 
The mosquito pupa, unlike the pupa of most insects, is quite an active creature. It is not, 
however, as it is sometimes termed, a nymph, a name which is properly reserved for the 
immature stages of insects which pass through a gradual metamorphosis. Three types of 
pupa are distinguished by Comstock (1920), namely those in which the legs and wings are 
free as in the Hymenoptera and Coleoptera (exarate pupae); those in which the legs and 
wings are glued to the body as in the Lepidoptera (obtected pupae); and those enclosed in 
the hardened larval skin as in many Diptera (coarctate pupae). The legs and wings of the 
mosquito pupa are glued to the body and in Comstock’s classification it is an active 
obtected pupa. 
In general appearance the pupa of ACdes aegypti resembles that of most other culicine 
mosquitoes. It differs from the anopheline pupa in having a more rounded and plump 
body and breathing trumpets which are cylindrical, not broadly flap-like as in that genus. 
The chief structures used in identification from other culicine pupae are : (1) the form of the 
respiratory trumpets; (2) the arrangement and characters of the hairs, especially those of 
the abdominal segments; and (3) the characters of the tail-fins or paddles. 
The body of the pupa consists of a large globular anterior portion, cephalothorax, and a 
narrower articulated abdomen., which is normally kept flexed under the cephalothorax and 
is used to propel the insect when swimming. This outward appearance, however, is largely 
a simulacrum, the result of glueing together of head, body, wings and legs to form a seeming 
whole. This can be clearly demonstrated if a newly emerged pupa is placed in some fixative, 
for example formalin acetic alcohol, which dissolves the cement bathing the parts before 
this hardens. Pupae so treated show the head and mouth-parts free, the wings opened out, 
the legs free and loosely displayed and the true body (thorax) made evident. 
Outstanding among descriptions of the pupa and its structure are the classical papers by 
Hurst (1890), the very detailed description of the changes taking place in this stage by 
Thompson (1905), and the very useful short account of pupal characters used in systematic 
work by Edwards (1941). Much information on pupal structure is also given in the papers 
by Marshall and Staley (1932), and by Brumpt (1941), dealing with the mechanism of 
emergence (see also Imms (1907, 1908) ; Eysell (1911); Seguy (1923) ; Sen (1924) ; and the 
early work of Causard (1898), drawing attention to the part played by air in emergence of 
aquatic pupae with mention of the mosquito on p. 260). 
On pupal chaetotaxy are : Ingram and Macfie (19 17,19 19) ; Macfie (1920) whose description 
of the chaetotaxy of the pupa of A. aegypti still forms the basis of work on this subject, and 
more recent papers by Senevet (1930-40); Christophers (1933); Baisas (1934-8) Crawford 
(1938) ; Belkin Knight and Rozeboom (1945) ; Rozeboom and Knight (1946) ; Knight and 
Chamberlain (1948) ; Mattingly (1949) ; Baisas and Pagayon (1949); Belkin (195 l-3). 
355 23-2 
THE PUPA 
Contributions dealing with special features are : Giles (1903), on the prepupa (see ch. x 
(e)) ; Kulagin (1905), on the pupal head and mouth-parts; Theodor (1924), on the respira- 
tory trumpets of A. aegypti pupa; Adie (19 12), Cantrell (1939) and Trembley (1944), on 
sex differentiation ; Zavrell (1907) and Constantinianu (1930), on pupal ocelli ; Hosselet 
(1925), on oenocytes in the pupa. 
THE HEAD AND MOUTH-PARTS (Figs.42,43) 
At the front of the cephalothorax is the flattened head with the trunk-like mouth-parts, 
forerunners of the proboscis, curled round beneath the cephalothorax like a keel. If the 
head, preferably of a young pupa, be carefully detached from the rest of the cephalothorax 
and laid on the flat facing the observer and so mounted without undue pressure, most of the 
structures composing these parts will be well displayed (Fig. 42 (2), (3), (4)). Conspicuous 
on the sides of the head are the large compound eyes and behind these the five ocelli much 
as in the larva. In front of the compound eyes in their upper portions and approaching 
each other in the median line are the large globular basal segments of the antennae, some- 
what larger in the male than in the female. From these the antennae sweep back in a curved 
Figure 42. The pupa. 
Lateral view of female pupa of ACdes aegypti. 
Anterior view of same. The left wing is shown slightly separated from the cephalothorax. 
a, outer hard cuticle forming part of cephalothoracic cuticle ; b, thin membrane of inner surface 
of wing not normally exposed. 
Anterior view of detached head of A. aegypti pupa (female). 
The same of the male pupa. In both cases the much retracted hypoderm forming the imaginal 
parts is shown. 
Bilobed membranous sac of tip of pupal labium showing thickenings and papillae. a, b, 
thickenings of the membrane; c, papilla of left lobe; d, developing labella. 
Transverse section of respiratory trumpet at level of opening. a, outer cuticular layer; b, felt- 
like inner lining composed of thin filamentous or sheet-like extensions of cells. Note double 
layer of hypoderm. 
Dorsal view of cephalothorax and first two abdominal segments. a, inset membranous area 
in first abdominal tergite; b, rod-like thickening on membrane extending from near base of 
float hair. 
Lateral view of first abdominal segment showing extensive membranous area with inset large 
functional spiracle opening into the ventral air cavity. 
Ventral view of same. Only a thin line of thickening is present. Segment II ventrally has 
cuticle resembling that of other segments. 
Lettering : an, antenna; an’, basal lobe of antenna; ats, antero-thoracic setae; CL, clypeus; 
E, compound eye with 5 ocelli; G, general plate; ha, pupal halter; Lr, labrum; md, mandible; 
mt, metanotum; mx, maxilla; mxp, maxillary palp, with developing imaginal palp; psc, post- 
scutellar area; psc’, torn edge of same ; rt, respiratory trumpet ; rt’, anterior thickening at base of 
same; rt”, posterior thickening from wing base; SC, scutum; SC’, torn edge of same; so, sensillum 
(‘hairless ring’); sp, spiracle; st, mark of functionless spiracle; T, tentorium with posterior end 
torn from head membrane; T’, anterior opening of tentorium; tb, tibiae (outer surface); tb’, 
tb”, tibiae of fore and mid legs; ts, tarsi; vp, vertical plate; W, pupal wing. 
Roman numerals indicate segments. 
Arabic figures indicate the setae as given under Belkin’s (1953) system in Table 21. 
For items in above lettering not shown on Fig. 42 see Fig. 43. 
356 
I 
md 
Y 4 
\ - . 2 
SP Q .‘=- T” 0 
I !i _ . . . ..*...*...- \L... :. . . . . . . - . 
. . ..i.r_,&” . . . . . . .._. 
Figure 42 
357 
THE PUPA 
fashion over the sides of the thorax. Passing back from the narrow gap between the basal 
lobes onto the dorsum of the head are two small plates separated by a shallow median 
groove. These correspond to the vertex of the future imaginal head and may be termed the 
verticalplates (head shields of Belkin, Knight and Rozeboom). During the act of emergence 
the longitudinal split down the back of the pupa ends on reaching the posterior border of 
these plates and is replaced by a transverse slit. It is here that the head of the imago is 
pushed forwards in the early stages of emergence. After emergence is complete the plates 
are pushed forwards to become two conspicuous oval pieces at the extreme front of the 
cast pupal skin (Fig. 43 (6) VP). 
Figure 43. The pupa. - ’ ‘ 
ha 6 1 05mm. 1 
Lateral view of scutum showing connections of respiratory trumpets. 
Dorsal (left) and ventral (right) view of abdominal segments showing setae numbered ac- 
cording to Belkin (1953). a, medium portion ninth tergite; b, midrib; c, buttress; d, paddle 
hair. 
Dorsal view of metanotum and left halter. Also dorsal view of left side’of abdominal seg- 
ments I and II. Hairs as under 2 but at higher magnification. 
Pupal hypopygium of male. Within the pupal gonocoxites are the retracted developing 
gonocoxites of the imago. a, pupal gonocoxite; b, developing gonocoxite of imago. 
Pupal hypopygium of female. Ventral view. c, cercus partly hidden by d, ninth sternite; 
c’, developing cercus of imago; d’, developing ninth sternite of imago. 
Dorsal view of pupal skin as left floating after emergence. Only cephalothorax is shown. See 
also Fig. 48. a, opening into sheath of clypeus and mouth-parts; b, membrane of back of 
head now opened out; c, hollow occupied by anterior coxae; d, sensory pits. 
For lettering see under Fig. 42. 
358 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Lateral to the compound eyes there is, on each side of the head, a smooth flat area of 
cuticle which carries the three postocular setae and corresponds to a part of the genal area 
of the larval head. At its posterior border this is reflected inwards as soft membrane 
forming the back of the head and apparent only on dissection or in sections. At a little 
distance below the level of the bottom of the compound eyes this surface terminates on 
each side at a cleft or groove beyond which is the large flattened maxillary palp of its side. 
This area forming the head laterally may be termed the genalplate of the pupa (Fig. 42 (3) G). 
On the front of the head between the compound eyes and below the gap between the 
basal lobes of the antennae is a conspicuous bulged area, the clypeus (Fig. 42 (3) CL). On 
each side of this in the angle between the compound eye and the basal lobe of the antenna 
are the anterior openings of the tentorium. As in the larva the hollow tentorial bars pass 
through the head, in this case to the end in the soft membrane already referred to as forming 
the back of the head. Passing downwards the clypeus continues without a break into the 
trunk-like Zabrum. Glued on each side of the labrum in both male and female are the long 
thin pupal mandibles and external to these the pupal maxillae. External to the maxillae in 
their basal portions are the broad flat areas of thepupalmaxillarypalps (Fig. 42 (3), (4) mxp). 
In the female these are somewhat shorter than in the male and within them can be seen the 
short rather club-shaped female imaginal palps modelled in the hypoderm. In the male the 
contained developing imaginal palps are long and thin and bent into an S-shaped curve 
(Fig. 42 (4) mxp). Behind, and largely hidden by the parts so far described, is the stout, 
but largely membranous, Zabium. In the female, lying in the same pupal sheath as the labium 
is the future imaginal hypopharynx identifiable by its sharp-pointed end. The hypopharynx 
develops as a ridge on the dorsal aspect of the labium and in the female later separates as 
a distinct organ. In the male it fails to separate. This organ is one of the few which is 
formed entirely in the pupal stage. 
All these elements continue in close approximation along the ventral aspect of the 
cephalothorax to its posterior part where they curve upwards to end in close association 
with the membranous ventral aspects of the first and second abdominal segments. Here the 
labium ends in a bilobed bag-like swelling furnished with some whispy sclerotisations and at 
the tip of each lobe a minute papilla (Fig. 42 (5)). Within this membranous bag lie the much 
shrunken-away labella of the imaginal labium. Closely applied to the sac ventrally is the 
turned-up spatulate end of the pupal labrum marked by conspicuous transverse ridges and at 
its sides are the closely applied undifferentiated ends of the pupal mandibles and maxillae. 
Owing to the early retraction of the hypoderm all these structures in the pupa are in the 
form of cuticular sheaths and already, even in the young pupa, there is a wide space between 
this pupal cuticle and the developing hypoderm forming the corresponding imaginal parts. 
The pupal wings and legs have already been extended in the formation of the prepupa 
within the body of the larva. But the mouth-parts up to the time of pupation have been 
still in the form of invaginated rudiments, namely: a large plicated backwardly projecting 
mass in the frontal region very conspicuous in sections of the later stages of the pupa, which 
when projected forwards constitutes the pupal labrum; a large invaginated double germinal 
bud lying in and fully occupying the labial area, which when extruded at pupation forms 
the pupal labium; and still other rudiments compacted in the stumpy larval mandibles 
and maxillae, which during pupation are pushed out to form the long slender organs of the 
pupa. More will be said about the extrusion of these various structures when describing the 
act of emergence in which as shown by Thompson they play a distinct role. 
359 
THE PUPA 
THE THORAX (Figs. 42,43) 
When the head has been removed there comes into view that part of the pupal surface 
corresponding to the prothorax and above this a convex surface corresponding to the 
anterior promontory of the imaginal thorax. On the sides of the pupal thorax just above 
the curved antennae towards their base are the antero-thoracic setae described later and 
further back is the broad convex scutum of the mesothorax. Along the median dorsal line 
of the scutum for the greater part of its extent is a sharp crest-like ridge, median keel of 
Belkin, Knight and Rozeboom. On each side of this crest is a band of smooth cuticle 
crossed by regularly spaced transverse thickenings. The central ridge forms the line of 
weakness along which the cuticle splits in the act of emergence. The bands of ridged cuticle 
at its sides are pushed over to the sides during emergence and form supporting edges 
giving stability to the pupal skin and helping to make this a safe platform for the emerging 
imago (Fig. 43 (6) SC’). Projecting from the sides of the scutum are the respiratory trumpets 
and dorsal to these towards the median line is on each side the single small dorsal seta. 
A little posterior to the trumpets are the wing roots from which the pupal wings pass down- 
wards on the sides of the thorax. The pupal wings show little or no indication of venation, 
which, however, is already showing up in the contained hypoderm forming the developing 
wings of the imago. Across the scutum at a level a little behind the wing roots is a trans- 
verse line behind which the surface is smooth and just before which the median crest and 
its accompanying striated areas cease. Beneath the cuticle in this position and stretching 
from side to side can be seen the developing scutellum of the imago and behind this the 
postscutellum. On each side just dorsal to the wing root is the single small supra-alar seta. 
Behind the extensive scutum is a short transverse bar, the metanotum, linking together two 
flat triangular areas constituting the pupal halteres. These lie behind the pupal wings with 
their apices directed posteriorly along the sides of the first abdominal segment. Within them 
can be seen the much smaller club-shaped developing imaginal halteres. On the bases of 
the halteres are the metanotal hairs, three on each side (Figs. 42 (7) ha; 43 (I), (2), (3) ha). 
Occupying the remaining parts of the lateral aspects of the pupa are the outer sides of the 
tibiae of the three pairs of legs, those of the fore- and mid-legs in front of the wings and 
those of the hind legs lying just under the wing edge (Fig. 42 (1) tb). In the prepupa it has 
been noted that the tarsi are turned up and lie behind and parallel to their respective tibiae. 
But during pupation they have become straightened out and in the pupa they lie in line 
with the tibiae and are curled up under the wing apex. The tarsi of the fore- and mid-legs 
make single loops in this position and those of the hind legs a double S-shaped loop. 
The respiratory trumpets (Fig. 43 (1) rt). The respiratory trumpets of the Culicini, in 
contrast to those of the Anophelini, are more or less cylindrical in shape, those of the 
Anophelini being more flap-like. A summary of the characters used in identification is 
given by Edwards (1941). Following Ingram and Macfie (19 19), the basal closed portion is 
termed the meatus and the open portion the pinna. The meatus is further subdivided into 
a proximal tracheoid portion marked with transverse striae and a distal reticulated portion 
in which the surface is covered with a fine network. The respiratory trumpets of AC;des 
aegypti, as noted by Theodor (1924) possess no tracheoid portion. They are tubular, some- 
what expanded from base to apex with a fairly oblique opening and when flattened appear 
rather broadly triangular. The open portion occupies one-third to one-half of the whole 
360 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
with a rounded notch in the apical lip. The basal end of the opening is narrow and termi- 
nates as a fine slit. The base is very loosely articulated allowing the trumpet to be easily 
swung into position by surface forces when brought to the surface. At the level of this 
articulation is a sharp bend which may possibly act as a valve closing the air passage when 
the trumpet is in certain positions. Giving support to the basal articulation is a cuticular 
fold anteriorly and an area of thickening extending from the wing base posteriorly 
(Fig. 43 (1) rt’, rt”). 
The trumpets arise from a triangular area formed by an extension of the scutum into the 
angle between the wing root behind and the curve of the antenna in front, an area that in 
the imago will form a somewhat depressed region of the pleura surrounding the anterior 
thoracic spiracle of the imago. Shining through the cuticle here is seen a considerable length 
of ballooned tracheal trunk. This leads from the trumpet to the developing anterior spiracle 
of the imago and is cast off with the pupal skin at emergence (see under tracheal system). 
The ventral air space (Fig. 48 (5) a). When the parts forming the cephalothorax become 
cemented, any spaces where the parts have not been in contact will become sealed off within 
the apparent body of the pupa. An important space of this nature is a large cavity lying 
ventral to the thorax. It is walled in laterally by the wings and legs and below by the 
mouth-parts. Within this space, which is strictly outside the real body of the pupa, is a col- 
lection of air forming a large bubble which can be readily seen in the young pupa before 
the parts darken. It is to a large extent due to this bubble, as pointed out by Hurst, that the 
pupa, besides being made very buoyant, is properly aligned at the surface in relation to the 
respiratory trumpets. Also as pointed out by Hurst there is a most important point in 
connection with this space, namely that into it open the large patent first abdominal 
spiracles. Thus the air in the cavity communicates via the tracheal system of the pupa with 
the external air. An interesting point in this connection, which does not appear to have 
been so far noted, is that pressure within the sac is apparently under control. Looking 
down upon a young (white) pupa the presence of the bubble where this presents in the 
region of the halteres is very evident. From time to time as this area is watched something 
very like a wink occurs. At first this was thought to be due to some movement of the 
halteres, but was afterwards seen to be due to the opening and closing of the large first 
abdominal spiracle. 
THE ABDOMEN 
The abdomen of the pupa has a curious resemblance to that of a lobster, consisting as it 
does of heavily sclerotised segments which are freely moveable on each other in flexion and 
extension with little or no lateral movement, the resemblance being further added to by the 
large flat terminal paddles or tail fins. Disregarding the tail fins and parts derived from 
more posterior segments there are eight fairly equally sized abdominal segments. The first 
lies posterior to the metanotum and carries on each side a conspicuous large branched 
hair, the den&tic tuft orfloat hair of Edwards. These hairs, from their size and black colour, 
are already conspicuous under the cuticle of the larva as it approaches pupation and stand 
out prominently to the naked eye in the newly emerged white pupa. Each arises at the edge 
of an oval area of soft membrane set in the tergite. Extending across the membrane, one 
end in close connection with the hair, is a long straight thickening strongly suggesting the 
stylus of a drum membrane. When the pupa is at the surface the float hairs lie close beneath 
THE PUPA 
the surface film. As suggested by Hurst they are probably sensory in function. Ventrally 
and laterally the first abdominal segment is largely membranous. On it, situated laterally 
and a little dorsally, are the large oval first abdominal spiracles. 
The second to the seventh segments are approximately of the same size and character. 
They consist of completely sclerotised rings, there being no area of pleural membrane 
laterally to indicate division between tergite and sternite, though markings on the cuticle 
give an appearance of this (Fig. 42 (1)). The segments carry rather inconspicuous hairs as 
described later. At least two of these hairs, hairs 8 and 10, arise from the pleural region of 
the segment. 
The eighth segment carries the paddles and other structures which are portions of the 
ninth segment. It carries a reduced complement of hairs, the most conspicuous being a large 
branched hair on each posterior angle. 
Dorsally the eighth tergite is continued backwards into a semilunar median projection 
with crinkled edges, the median lobe of the ninth tergite. This is the form finally taken by 
the median portion of the hypoderm of the larval siphon after the tracheal trunks and 
other stigmatic structures have been withdrawn from it at pupation. Beneath this plate 
can still be seen in sections the shrunken remains of the cellular coat of the tracheal trunks 
left to degenerate after the cuticular intima has been withdrawn. On each side of the 
posterior margin of the segment are articulated the pupal paddles. These are withdrawn at 
pupation from the lateral portions of the larval siphon and are the lateral lobes of the ninth 
tergite. Lying ventral to the paddles are the parts withdrawn from the anal segment of the 
larva that will form the proctiger of the hypopygium of the imago with characters depending 
upon the sex. 
The pupal paddles (Fig. 43 (2) (b)). In A. aegypti the paddles are almost circular in shape, 
being only slightly longer than broad (index 1*2-1.3). They possess a median longitudinal 
thickening, the midrib, and at their base a thickening termed by Belkin, Knight and 
Rozeboom the buttress. At the termination of the midrib is the paddle hair or apical seta, 
which in A. aegypti is about one-quarter the length of the paddle. In the Anopheles pupa 
a small accessory paddle hair is present near the main hair arising ventrally. In CuZex an 
accessory hair is also present arising dorsally. In AL;des aegypti there is no accessory hair. 
On the distal margin of the paddle there are present in A. aegypti fine rnicrotrichiae-like 
spines, somewhat larger on the portion external to the paddle hair. The paddles normally 
overlap by about half their width. They are the chief organs of pupal motility. 
The pupal hypopygium (Fig. 43 (4), (5)). Ventral to the paddles in the male are the relatively 
large gonocoxites. These form conical projections with a deep median fissure between them 
extending almost to their bases. The ninth stemite is a narrow inconspicuous transverse 
band at their base. The gonocoxites are already formed in the larva on the ventral aspect of 
the anal segment. The parts withdrawn from the apical dorsal region of the anal segment 
do not figure conspicuously in the male pupa where they lie behind the gonocoxites. They 
become the anal lobe in the male hypopygium. 
In the female there are also two conical projections, but these are smaller and blunter 
than in the male and are not so deeply separated by the median fissure. Moreover, they are 
not genital appendages but are the cerci being formed from the hypoderm in the apical 
dorsal part of the anal segment of the larva. Further in the female there is present, lying 
ventral to the projections and extending well up their length, a conspicuous semicircular 
362 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
plate (Fig. 43 (5) d’). This is the ninth sternite and its presence or absence enables a final 
decision as to the sex to be made. It is easily visible in lateral view, thus enabling final proof 
of sexing to be made even in the living pupa with little or no difficulty. There are no parts 
representing the gonapophyses. 
THE PUPAL SKIN 
The cast skin of the pupa has been extensively used for purposes of systematic description. 
As noted by Edwards (1941), for examination it should be suitably dissected, as otherwise 
when mounted whole flat the parts are much confused. The method of dissection used by 
Edwards is as follows. First the whole abdomen should be carefully detached, taking care 
not to injure the first abdominal segment; next the two sides of the thorax should be 
separated by means of needles inserted into the dorsal slit, separating the head with the 
antennae and proboscis which readily comes away, and cutting through the bar of the 
metanotum; the four parts, namely the abdomen, the two sides of the thorax and the head, 
should then be mounted flat, avoiding undue pressure. Knight and Chamberlain separate 
the metanotum with the abdomen. 
The pupal skin differs from the cast skin of the larva in that, besides the cuticle of such 
parts as are exposed at the surface and are more or less firm and sclerotised, there are 
extensive areas not exposed at the surface where the cuticle is thin and membranous and 
difficult to follow except in sections. Thus the back of the head, which in the pupa is hidden 
by the head being flattened against the thorax, is still represented by thin membrane to 
which the ends of the tentorial bars are attached before they are torn away in the act of 
emergence. The pupal skin left floating after emergence is on this account rather more 
complicated than might be expected and a word may be said in this connection. Pushed out 
well in front are the displaced small oval vertical plates (Fig. 43 (6) VP). Along the sides of 
the now widely open empty skin are the edges of the dorsal split with their characteristic 
striated strips. These strips, resting on the water, amount almost to lateral outboards 
giving to the floating skin considerable extra stability. Between the striated strips and the 
vertical plates are the now empty globular antenna1 bases, and projecting below these are 
the tentorial bars with their torn-away free ends. Behind the antenna1 bases are areas of 
membrane that have been covered in at the back of the head and front of the thorax and 
with these is a portion of harder cuticle carrying the anterior thoracic hairs. Posterior to 
the striated edges are the smoothly torn edges of the postnotal area extending back to the 
metanotum, which is left intact. On the floor of the empty skin are the openings into the 
sheath of the clypeus and depressions in which the anterior coxae have lain. Laterally are 
the openings into the wing sheaths. Furthest back of all is the widely distended empty skin 
of the abdomen. 
DIFFERENTIATION OF THE SEXES 
Differentiation of the sexes, which in the larva is only obscurely evident, becomes in the 
pupa obvious. The outstanding distinction is size. This is most marked where the rearing 
has been optimal. But even in poor cultures the sex is usually obvious. Only in starvation 
forms are the two sexes almost equal in size. Even so the female is usually slightly larger. 
The only authors, so far as I am aware, who emphasise, or even mention, this useful point 
are Cantrell (1939) and Trembley (1944). The first-mentioned author gives a table of six 
series of measurements of the length of the cephalothorax in female and male pupae of 
363 
THE PUPA 
A. aegypti. In five of the series the difference is as between 10 and 19 per cent, which in 
volume or weight would be equivalent to the cube of this. 
Besides difference in size there are slight differences in shape, the female pupa being 
usually more bulged at the sides. The most certain distinction is of course the character of 
the genitalia which are situated ventral to the tail paddles and are readily examined in the 
dead pupa or still more readily in the cast skin. In the case of the living pupa, however, 
there is little difficulty in determining the sex in this way if the pupa is allowed to lie upon 
its side, as it naturally does, on the slide. The critical feature is then the presence or absence 
of the projecting plate of the ninth sternite (see under description of the pupal hypopygium). 
Ability to distinguish the sex of pupae is extremely useful, almost essential in critical 
experimental work. Thus, for example, 100 pupae of a particular sex are quite easily pipetted 
out for emergence. This is not only much less laborious than collecting 100 of a given sex 
from the adults in a cage with suction tube, but has the further advantage that there is no 
handling of the adult insect. Even apart from the hypopygeal characters the pupal skins 
of the two sexes are readily distinguished at a glance both by size and by reason of the 
greater thinness and delicacy of those of the male. It is easy therefore to check up after 
hatching out a batch of pupae what number of each sex has emerged. 
(b) CHAETOTAXY OF THE PUPA 
As already noted when dealing with the larval chaetotaxy (ch. IX (d), there have been a 
number of different systems of notation for the larval and pupal hairs. The first fully to 
describe the pupal hairs was Macfie (1920), who gave a description of the hairs of the pupa 
of A. aegypti with a nomenclature for hairs of the cephalothorax and abdomen. Later a 
very complete study was made of the pupal abdomen by Baisas (1934--Q, who adopted with 
some modifications the scheme of notation introduced by Macfie and developed by Senevet 
(1930) and Christophers (1933). It was this notation that was adopted by Edwards (1941) 
and that, following this author, has been widely used. As a result, however, of observations 
on a large number of genera, more especially by Knight and Chamberlain (1948), and of the 
study of the homologies between larval and pupal chaetotaxy by Rozeboom and Knight 
(1946); Baisas and Pagayon (1949) ; and by Belkin (1951-3), a new notation had become 
necessary, that put forward by Belkin (1952) with corrections by Belkin (1953) being now 
in general acceptance, and giving a serial notation applicable to both the larva and pupa 
(see also remarks under the larva in ch. IX). 
Alterations beyond a certain point, however, are inevitably confusing and there are 
important works dealing with the pupa, such as the extensive work of Senevet on North 
African Culicines and of Edwards on Ethiopian species, as also of Knight and Chamber- 
lain and others on eastern forms where notation has been that used by Edwards or earlier 
systems. In Table 21 there has therefore been given for convenient cross reference the 
original notation by Macfie; the modification by Baisas as used by Edwards ; the more 
consecutive numbers used by Knight and Chamberlain and adopted by Belkin modified 
to apply both to larva and pupa; and the final consecutive numbering by Belkin (1953). 
Mention should here be made of the item termed by authors the ‘hairless socket’, a 
small hairless ring present on abdominal segments III-V of the pupa and situated between 
hairs 5 and 4. This is not included in Table 2 1, and is now considered to be a sensillum and 
not a hair. 
364 
CHAETOTAXY 
The reader should also be reminded that in the first larval instar and in the pupa the 
hairs 9 and 13, the transitory hairs, do not appear in the corrected Belkin notation (see 
ch. IX (6)). 
Table 21. Designation of pupal hairs according to authors 
Position of hair 
Cephalothorax 
Post ocular 
Antero-thoracic 
Mesothoracic 
Metathoracic 
Abdomen 
Segment I Dorsal 
Ventral 
Segments II-VII Dorsal 
Ventral 
Segment VIII 
Segment IX Dorsal 
Ventral 
Paddle Macfie 
(1920) Edwards Knight and 
Chamberlain 
(1941) (1948) Belkin 
(1953) 
l-3 l-3 3-1 l-3 
4-7 4-7 4-7 4-7 
8-9 8-9 8-9 8-9 
8 0 10 10 
9 P 11 11 
10 R 12 12 
C 
1 
2 
4 
3 
5 
6 
7 ; 
K 
M 
L 
s 
T 
u 2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
10 
Nil 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
1 
5 
8 
13 
8 
7 1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
6 
7 
10 
D 
C 
C” 
C’ 
B 
B’ 
A 
A’ 
E 
D 
C 
B 
A 
D 
P 
A 
- 
- 
- 5 
C 
c 
4 
B 
2 
1 
A 
6 
7 
D 
8 
- 
5 
A’ 
A 
- 
- 
- 0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
10 
11 
12 
14 
0 
4 
7 
14 
7 
6 Notes 
(4 
(b) 
(4 
(4 
(a) Hair 10 displaced dorsally by presence of pupal haltere. 
(b) Sensillum (0 of Knight and Chamberlain) between 5 and 4. 
(c) Paddle is the lateral portion of tergite IX. 
(d) Not present in A2de.s aegypti. 
A point that may be of some help in identification of abdominal hairs and explains to 
some extent the somewhat confusing use of letters to signify some of the hairs is that 
originally made by Macfie in giving his system. Looking at an abdominal segment of the 
pupa in dorsal view there are usually three hairs arising on or near the posterior margin of 
the segment. From without inwards these are given by Macfie as A, B and C (6,4 and 1 of 
Belkin). Near A, and a little anterior, is A’ (7 of Belkin). A little anterior to B is B’ (5 of 
Be&in) and anterior to C are C’ and C”. The changes undergone in this quite helpful early 
notation will be seen from the table. In the present text and in Figs. 42 and 43 the 
numbering of hairs is that of Belkin (1953), as given in Table, 21. 
365 
THE PUPA 
CHAETOTAXY OF THE PUPAL CEPHALOTHORAX 
Hairs l-3 of the cephalothorax are situated on each side on the plate behind the compound 
eye and ventral to the curved basal portion of the antenna. Hair 1 is the most dorsal and 
is situated above the ocellus. Hairs 2 and 3 lie below the ocellus and towards the point of 
origin of the maxillary palps from the plate. The plate, usually termed the ‘post-ocular 
plate’, represents part of the gena of the imago, the hairs l-3 being considered respectively 
to represent head hairs 10, 12 and 13 of the imago. 
Hairs 4-7 are situated on each side above the curved antenna on the anterior lateral 
angles of the thorax on a portion of the dorsal shield corresponding to the prothoracic 
lobe of the imago (Fig. 43 (1) at), hairs 4 and 5 being a little anterior to 6 and 7. They 
represent the prothoracic hairs of the imago. 
The mesothoracic hairs 8 and 9 are situated on the convex scutum, hair 8 being a little 
dorsal and posterior to the trumpet, and 9 just mesad of the line of origin of the wing 
(Fig. 43 (l), (8), (9)). Th e metathoracic hairs 10, 11 and 12 are situated on each side in a line 
on the metathoracic plate internal to the more expanded portion representing the haltere 
(Fig. 43 (3), (lo), (1 I), (12)). Hair 10 is mesad and commonly bifid, hair 11 is longer than 
the others and single. They are homologous with the larval metathoracic hairs 1, 2 and 3 
respectively. 
CHAETOTAXY OF THE PUPAL ABDOMEN (Fig.42(2),(3)) 
Except for segments I and VIII the hairs of the pupal abdomen resemble in their number 
and arrangement those of the larva. Their notation by different authors is given in Table 21. 
As in the larva, those for each segment are numbered O-14 (omitting the transitory hairs 9 
and 13), O-5 being dorsal, 6-7 lateral and 8-14 ventral. 
The small hair 0 is present on each segment II-VIII much as in the larva towards the 
anterior portion of the segment. The remaining dorsal hairs also have much the arrange- 
ment seen in the larva (Fig. 43 (2), (3)). Hair 1 is the most mesad and like hair 4 arises on or 
near the posterior margin of the segment. Hairs 2,3 and 5 lie more on the segment and are 
usually small and simple hairs. Hair 4 is Macfie’s hair B. Approximately between 5 and 4 
on segments III-V is the sensillum (hairless ring of authors). Hairs 6 and 7 are conspicuous 
as being at the outer posterior angle of the segment. Hair 6 is simple, long on segment VI 
and very small on segment VII. Hair 7 increases gradually in size, becoming thick and more 
thorn-like to segment VI. Ventrally are hairs 8-14 (Fig. 43 (2)). Hair 8, as in the larva, is 
situated laterally and more forward than the others and, as in the larva, posterior to the 
pupal spiracular marks (pupal puncta). Hairs 10, 11 and 12, on the outer half of the 
posterior end of the segment. The minute hair 14, as in the larva, is present in the inter- 
segmental line anterior to segments VII and VIII and is stated by Macfie to be present on 
the remaining segments, though I have not been able to verify this. The two hairs are much 
more conspicuous on the anterior margin of segment VIII than on other segments. 
On segment I hair 1 forms the conspicuous dendritic tuft hair. The remaining hairs are 
in a line towards the anterior margin of the segment, 2 and 3 being most mesal, then 
another pair 5 and 4, and towards the outer border 6, 7 and 10, the last being displaced 
from its normal position by the large haltere rudiments (Fig. 43 (3)). There are no hairs on 
the ventral aspect of segment I. 
On segment VIII the only hairs on the dorsal surface are, on each side, the small 
366 
CHAETOTAXY 
anteriorly situated hair 0 and a fairly developed simple hair on the posterior border 
(hair 4). Laterally is the large branched hair 7, which on this segment consists of 4 or 5 
large thick branches of about equal length carrying very fine lateral filamentous branches. 
There are no hairs on the ventral surface. 
The paddles carry only the single unbranched main paddle hair. The paddle hair 
(hair 1) and the accessory paddle hair (hair 2) are considered by Belkin (1953) to be prob- 
ably the two lateral hairs of the ventral valve of the larval siphon. The paddles ‘are the 
lateral portions of the ninth tergite and it would seem very likely that the paddle hair and 
accessory paddle hair represent the hairs 6 and 7 conspicuous at the lateral angles of the 
other tergites. 
The chief characteristics of the pupal hairs of A&Ies aegypti are given by Edwards (1941) 
as follows : 
(1) The dorsal thoracic hair (hair 8) is very short and usually double. 
(2) The middle metathoracic hair is markedly longer than the other two. 
(3) The two inner and the two outer hairs on segment I (hairs 2, 3 and 6, 7) are subequal in 
length and single (an unusual condition) (Fig. 43 (3)). 
(4) Hair 1 on segment II is usually double or triple. 
(5) On segment III hair 1 is usually double placed obliquely internal to hair 4 (not behind it). 
(6) Hair 6 is rather spine-like even on segment II, progressively longer on III-V, but not 
longer on VI than V. It is single and strong and much longer on VII than on VI. On VIII it has 
2-5 subplumose branches reaching to about the middle of the paddle. 
(7) Hair 4 on segments II-VI is single, not more than half as long as the segments. 
(c) THE TRACHEAL, MUSCULAR AND OTHER SYSTEMS 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ON INTERNAL 
STRUCTURE OF THE PUPA 
The pupa is essentially an intermediate form between the larva and the imago, both of 
which lead an active life of their own, the larva as an aquatic and the imago as a terrestrial 
winged insect. Hence almost any stage between the structures required for the larva and 
those for the imago will be found in the pupa, making any description of the systems a study 
of development rather than one relevant to the pupa as such. One system, however, 
namely the tracheal system, plays so prominent a role in the life of the pupa in both the 
beginning and the end of this stage that it merits special consideration. Another system 
which cannot be passed over lightly is the muscular, in that the enormously developed 
imaginal musculature is imposed anew upon that of the larval. The circulatory and nervous 
systems are less profoundly altered though in these as in the alimentary canal there are 
stages in the pupa which are helpful in deciding some homologies of imaginal structures. 
THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM (Fig.44) 
The tracheal system of the pupa is formed around the larval system as present in the pre- 
pupa and ends as that of the adult insect lying ready for emergence swathed in the pupal 
cuticle. From one point of view the characters most properly pertaining to the pupa are 
those in the young pupa and later changes might be regarded as in increasing degree those 
pertaining to the imago. Such a view, here adopted, will simplify description and enable 
changes more properly belonging to adult structure to be dealt with more satisfactorily 
later. To a large extent the main features of the pupal tracheal system have already been 
367 
THE PUPA 
laid down at pupation when, the intima of the larval tracheae being withdrawn, the newly 
formed system behind this has come into use. According to Hurst no fresh intima to the 
tracheae proper to the pupa is developed with the exception of that lining the length of 
trachea linking the respiratory trumpets to the position where the imaginal spiracle is 
eventually formed and the lining of the branch joining the tracheal trunk to the spiracle 
of the first abdomal segment, both of which are cast off with the pupal skin. It is true that 
in the cast pupal skin no such wealth of cast intima is to be seen as in the cast larval skin. 
Careful examination will, however, show that there is a considerable extent of very thin 
intima cast which is devoid of any taenidia, indicating that the pupal stage does not, with 
the exceptions noted, produce a taenidial lining proper to itself. 
Figure 44. The pupa. Tracheal system. 
1 Tracheae of the cephalothorax viewed from ventral aspect. 
2 The same viewed from the side. 
Lettering: rt, base of respiratory trumpet; g, thoracic ganglia; l-47, numbers of tracheae as 
given in tabular statement on p. 369 of pupal tracheae. 40 13 27 
The following are the chief changes that occur at pupation : 
(1) The structures about the terminal spiracles of the larva with the cuticular lining of 
the tracheal trunks up to the first line of weakness in the seventh segment are withdrawn 
and not replaced. The cellular layer representing these shrinks and forms solid cords 
extending from the terminations of the pupal tracheal trunks to the under side of the ninth 
pupal tergite. 
(2) The spiracular cords leading from the mesothoracic punctae to the mesothoracic 
knot are replaced by large patent tracheal trunks linking the mesothoracic spiracles with 
the main system. 
(3) The spiracular cords and puncta of the first abdominal segment are replaced by large 
patent tracheae and functional spiracles opening into the ventral air space. 
(4) With the general flattening of the pupal head and neighbouring parts the more 
anterior portions of the trunks in the thorax are compressed and pushed back making a 
368 
TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
sharp angle or kink on each side where the fore and hind parts of the tracheal trunk system 
meet at the breathing trumpets (Fig. 44 (2)). 
Changes other than those noted mainly occur in the hypoderm and are hence to be 
regarded as imaginal rather than pupal or in providing new vessels for the increased mass of 
wing muscle in the thorax. Thus in the pupa strictly speaking there is no metathoracic 
functional spiracle. But at an early stage a large spiracle is developed in this position in the 
hypoderm. In the pupal abdomen there are no functional spiracles (except for the first 
segment). But marks on the cuticle (best seen in the pupal skin) indicate the position of 
spiracles on segments II-VIII, those on segment VIII being near the posterior border. 
In face of the considerable changes noted above, the tracheal system in the pupa never- 
theless still maintains in a remarkable manner the essential features of the system in the 
larva. Thus the connectives which in the larva take a more or less direct course giving off 
quite small branches only to the germinal bud rudiments of leg, wing and haltere still give 
the same, but much enlarged, branches to the now extended legs, wings and halteres of the 
pupa passing in long loops down the sides of the coxae to do so. This identity of the pupal 
and larval tracheal systems will be very apparent from the numbers given in the tabular 
statement of tracheae where the homologous pupal branches have been given the numbers 
previously applied to those of the larva. Almost all the pupal branches are capable of 
being thus numbered. 
As in the larva the main tracheal trunks in the pupa are much dilated and ballooned. 
In addition to the large anterior commissure small commissural branches are present as in 
the larva, two in the thorax and one in each segment II-VII. The other tracheal vessels 
and even their smaller branches are very much as in the larva. Thus in the head the dorsal 
cephalic still supplies the brain and antenna1 region and the ventral cephalic the mouth- 
parts and labrum with branches much as in the larva. 
Tracheation of the abdominal segments, except for the eighth and anal segments, is very 
similar to that of the larva. For each segment II-VII there is on each tracheal trunk towards 
the anterior end of the segment an insertion plaque. From this there take origin : (1) a 
spiracular trachea; (2) a connective passing forwards; (3) a visceral trachea passing 
directly inwards; (4) a ventral trachea passing round the segment to its ventral aspect; 
(5) a connective passing backwards. This last usually takes origin a little distance from the 
base of the ventral trachea (as in the larva). From the backward connective about the 
middle of the segment there arises a small dorsal branch. 
The tracheal trunks, as patent vessels, now end at the seventh segment, being continued 
only as solid cords composed of cells remaining over from the epithelial coats of the 
trunks after withdrawal at pupation of their intimal lining. These cords, as already noted, 
continue backwards to the under side of the semicircular median lobe of the ninth tergite 
where they may still show some indication of their original tubular structure. The eighth 
and anal segments receive their tracheal supply from lateral tracheae taking off from the 
trunks where their tracheal character terminates. 
TABULAR STATEMENT OF PUPAL TRACHEAE 
1. Common cephalic. A short trunk directed medianly and ventrally. Gives off the following 
branches at its inner end : 
2. Dorsal cephalic. To brain and antenna1 region (branches 4-9). 
3. Commissural. The main anterior commissure as in the larva but stouter. 
24 369 CH 
THE PUPA 
10. Ventral cephalic. To mouth-parts and other head structures (branches 14-23). In thorax 
gives off: 
11. Prothoracic dividing into : 
12. Trachea to first leg. 
13. Branch ending in region of thoracic ganglion 1. 
24. Common mesothoracic. In the pupa contracted to a bulbous dilatation at junction of the 
common cephalic with the main thoracic trunk. From it the following branches arise: 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. Mesothoracic spiracular. A sausage-shaped tracheal trunk linking the respiratory 
trumpet of its side with the main system and joining 24 at position of future imaginal 
spiracle. 
Mesothoracic dorsal. Tracheae arising from common origin or short basal trunk, namely, 
26’ passing forwards and inwards to front of dorsum, and 26” twin tracheae passing 
backwards and outwards to lateral area of dorsum. 
Mesothoracic ventral. Arises along with or as branch near base of 28. Divides into 
branch to pleura and one ending near thoracic ganglion. 
Meso-meta connective. Long looped trachea directed ventrally. Gives off: 
30. Branch to wing. Taking origin towards anterior end. 
29. Trachea of middle leg arising from apex of loop. 
32. Thoracic tracheal trunk. Dilated trunk with inner wall thin and membranous. Extends from 
junction with 24 to level of open spiracular trachea of first abdominal segment. Gives off: 
33. Commissural (mesothoracic). Linking trunks towards anterior end and giving branches 
to heart, etc. A small trachea. 
34. Commissural (metathoracic). A small trachea linking trunks in the metathoracic region. 
36. Common metathoracic. Trachea from trunk to metathoracic knot and branches radiating 
from that, namely 
38. Spiracular. Becomes open trachea in hypoderm. 
39. Metathoracic dorsal. Newly formed or enlarged branches passing into posterior 
portion of dorsum to supply wing muscles. 
40. Metathoracic ventral. A small branch to pleura. 
41. Connective (meta- abd.). Forming ventral loop and giving branches: 
42. Branch to haltere. From near anterior end of connective. 
43. Branch to hind leg. Arising from apex of loop. 
44. Spiracular (I abd.). A patent and wide trachea passing from the trunk to the open spiracle. 
From its inner end (insertion plaque), which receives the connective 4 1, arise also the following : 
45. Visceral branch. Passes directly inwards to end in branches among the remnants of the 
gastric caeca. 
47. Connective (I-II). About its middle gives off: 
50. Ventral branch for the segment. 
(For description of the abdominal tracheae see text.) 
THE ALIMENTARY CANAL (Fig. 45) 
The alimentary canal during the pupal stage undergoes changes that convert the larval into 
the imaginal canal. These changes begin in the late (prepupal) stage of the larva by the with- 
drawal of the invaginated portion of oesophagus from the proventriculus. At pupation 
this is followed by other changes. The entire elaborate cuticular structures lining the mouth 
and pharynx are withdrawn, leaving these structures more or less featureless with a simple 
cellular lining. At the point that was previously a recessed angle between the cardia and 
the oesophageal invagination there develops an annular thickening which eventually 
projects far into the lumen (Fig. 45 (4), (7) ar). There follow a number of other changes 
which are mainly degenerative. The cells of the outer wall of the proventriculus (car&a), 
370 
ALIMENTARY CANAL 
and also those lining the gastric caeca, show marked nuclear and other changes and are 
eventually cast off into the lumen of their respective parts, leaving these structures with thin 
walls formed only by small regenerative cells. Similar changes occur in the mid-gut, the 
whole of the alimentary canal from the annular thickening to the point of entry of the 
Malpighian tubules being reduced to a much narrowed simple tube at first filled with 
massive cast-off epithelium and later, when this is absorbed, almost free of contents. Both 
cardia and the gastric caeca are included in these changes and later cease to be differentiated 
from the rest of the canal (Fig. 45 (6), (7)). 
Posterior to the pyloric ampulla changes in the ileum consist chiefly in the absorption 
and replacement of the muscular coat. The colon loses its characteristic larval appearance 
and its walls degenerate, its epithelium being replaced according to Thompson by en- 
croachment of cells growing backwards from the ileum and forwards from the rectum. 
Following this general degeneration and absorption of larval elements reconstructive 
changes take place which eventually result in formation of the imaginal structures. The 
now much narrowed portion of canal anterior to the brain (pharynx and oral cavity) 
develops a strong cuticular lining and becomes the ‘buccal cavity’ of many authors 
(Fig. 45 (I), (2)). That part of the oesophagus lying in the head immediately behind the 
cerebral commissure likewise develops a strong cuticular lining and forms the ‘sucking 
pump’ as described later in the imago. The portion of canal behind this as far back as the 
annular ring remains as the ‘ oesophagus’ of the imago. 
These parts have been differently named by authors and their homologies may be 
briefly considered. Sinton and Cove11 (1927) and Barraud and Cove11 (1928), following Nuttal 
and Shipley’s nomenclature, have used the terms pharynx and buccal cavity for the two parts 
in the imago. It will be clear, however, that the sucking pump of the imago is not homo- 
logous with the pharynx of the larva, whilst the ‘ buccal cavity’ is. Snodgrass (193Q p. 388, 
defines the pharynx as that part between the mouth and the oesophagus usually not 
extending beyond the nerve ring. The pharynx of the larva corresponds accurately to this 
description and complies with other requirements and would appear therefore to be 
correctly so named. The ‘ pump ’ of the imago lies behind the nerve ring and corresponds to 
what in the larva is the anterior portion of the oesophagus. Snodgrass, however, notes that 
in some insects there is a ‘posterior pharynx’ behind the brain, and to such the sucking 
pump of the mosquito may be considered to conform. Morphologically, therefore, this 
organ may conveniently be so termed. It consists of that portion only of the oesophagus 
of the larva that lies within the head extending back to about the position occupied by the 
cervical diaphragm. The pharynx lies anterior to the cerebral commissure. Its posterior 
angle is clearly defined by the insertions of the larval muscles 15, 16 and 17 as seen in the 
early pupal stage (Fig. 45 (I), (2)). In the late pupa this becomes the roof of the anterior 
end of the posterior pharynx of the imago. At this point, that is at the meeting point of 
pharynxand posterior pharynx, there is a small strongly sclerotised lateral bar which receives 
the insertions of the larval head muscle 13 (adult head muscle 19) as also strong lateral 
muscular bundles apparently corresponding to larval head muscle 14.* This appears to 
represent the much contracted lateral angles of the larval pharynx just in front of which the 
connective to the frontal ganglion passes in the imago as in the larva. It appears to be the 
Zateral~ange of the pharyngeal armature of Sinton and Covell. 
* For numbering of the head muscles see tabulations under muscular system for the larva and for the adult; 
also cross homologies given in Table 22. 
37= 24-2 
THE PUPA 
The anterior limit of the imaginal parts corresponding to the larval pharynx is shown by 
the position in the early pupa of those structures which in the hypoderm have underlain 
the epipharynx and other labral parts including the feeding brushes. These form a much 
shrunken bilobed cellular mass lying above the roof of the oral passage a little posterior 
to the entry of the salivary duct (salivary pump). At this time head muscle 4 (elevator of 
the epipharynx) is still to be seen inserted at its posterior border (Fig. 45 (1)). In spite of 
its conspicuous appearance this cellular mass is later wholly absorbed, the only trace left 
in the imago of all the organs it represents being the ‘palatal papillae’ of Sinton and Cove11 
(‘small conical setae’ of Thompson, p. 183). The roof of the larval pharynx forms the 
anterior and posterior hard palate of Sinton and Covell. 
That portion of the oesophagus behind the posterior pharynx undergoes little change. 
The inner epithelial coat remains intact. The muscular coat, however, in accordance with 
what appears to be a general rule for all the viscera, undergoes lysis and in the imago the 
walls of this portion, that is what is usually regarded as oesophagus, are thin and poorly 
supplied with muscles. At the posterior end, just cephalad to the annular ring, there 
develops at each lateral angle a small pouch with characteristic walls, the dorsal diverticula 
of the imago. From its median ventral wall there develops the much larger rudiment of 
the ventral diverticulum (Fig. 45 (7) vdl). This appears as a long rod-like growth of charac- 
teristic tissue which lies ventral to the now greatly narrowed mid-gut as far back as the 
Figure 45. The pupa. Alimentary system. 
Median sagittal section of head of early pupa. 
The same of a pupa approaching emergence. The two figures show the homologies as between 
the imaginal and larval pharynx and related parts. The changes in musculature are also indi- 
cated by the muscle numbers. Larval muscles (Fig. 1) 4-23. See Table 22. Imaginal muscles 
(Fig. 2) 4-24. See Table 22. Larval muscles 4, 15, 18 are not carried through; nos. 13, 16, 17, 
22, 23 become respectively imaginal muscles 19, 21, 22 (not shown in figure), 23, 24, of the 
imaginal series. a, pupal cuticle now with a large space between it and the retracted hypoderm 
forming the imaginal parts. 
Transverse section through the mouth-parts of the pupa showing pupal sheaths and contained 
developing imaginal parts. 
Longitudinal section through the proventriculus and related parts in a larva approaching 
pupation. a, epithelium of invaginated portion of oesophagus now withdrawn from the 
proventricular invagination; b, muscle of muscular coat of oesophagus; c, cellular coat of 
cardia. 
Longitudinal section through portion of mid-gut of an early pupa showing: (a) cast-off and 
disorganised epithelial coat and (b) formation of new coat of small cells with beginnings of the 
imaginal muscular coat (c). 
Longitudinal section through the region of the proventriculus and gastric caeca of the early 
pupa. a, cast-off epithelial cells; b, disorganised epithelium of gastric caeca; c, cast-off mid- 
gut epithelium. 
The same parts of an advanced pupa. Same magnification. 
Lettering: arm, antenna1 nerve; ar, annular ring; Cc, cerebral commissure; ca, corpus allatum; 
cd, cervical diaphragm; cg, cingulum muscle; Dd’, level at which the dorsal diverticula develop ; 
epr, developing epipharynx ; fg, frontal ganglion; hp, hypopharynx ; L, labium ; Zr’, pupal cuticle 
of labral sheath; Zr”, developing imaginal labrum; Mg, mid-gut; md, mandible ; mx, maxilla; 
mxp, maxillary palp; Oe, oesophagus; P, pharynx; P’, posterior pharynx; sg, salivary gland; 
slm, dilator muscle of salivary pump; sip, salivary pump; sip’, developing salivary pump; vdl, 
developing ventral diverticulum; vtr, ventral transverse muscle. 
372 
A a 
,’ 
Figure 45 
373 
THE PUPA 
first abdominal segment. The annular ring becomes the so-called proventriculus of the 
imago, a structure clearly not wholly homologous with the more complex organ of the 
larva and better termed the oesophageal valve. 
As already noted, the cellular lining of the larval cardia and of the gastric caeca is cast off 
and absorbed. With this the organs become merged into and form part of the new mid-gut, 
now an extremely long and narrow empty tube (Fig. 45 (7)). Apart from the disappearance 
of the colon as a distinct organ the most notable happening in the hinder part of the canal 
is the appearance of the rectal glands of the imago. 
Of accessory structures the single salivary gland on each side of the larva early shows 
degeneration and vacuolisation of its cells and is eventually lysed and absorbed. The acini 
of the imaginal glands develop as new growths from the distal end of the salivary glands. 
These lie in the pupa as a number of dark-staining tubules on each side of and ventral to that 
portion of the gut corresponding to the cardia (Fig. 45 (7)). The Malpighian tubules remain 
intact from larva to imago. 
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM (Fig.46) 
During the pupal period an almost complete change occurs from the larval to the imaginal 
musculature. With a few exceptions the larval muscles undergo histolysis and disappear, 
whilst the majority of the imaginal muscles are formed independently of those of the larva. 
In certain cases muscles are carried through from the larva to the imago, but even in such 
cases the appearance and character of the muscles and even its anatomical relations and 
functions are usually more or less changed. 
The change from one musculature to the other takes place almost entirely in the pupal 
stage, the musculature in the early pupa being that of the larva, whilst in the late pupa it is 
that of the adult. Differing as the two system do it becomes scarcely practicable to use the 
same numbered list of muscles for the two series and it has been thought preferable to give 
separate numbered lists of larval and imaginal muscles as has been done under the muscular 
system of the larva in chapter XIII and of the imago in chapter XXVI. Questions of homo- 
logy can, however, be discussed in the present chapter under the pupa, in which stage the 
change from one to the other system takes place. 
Disappearance of the larval muscles, as noted by Thompson (1905), does not appear to 
be associated with marked phagocytosis, though accumulations of small cells with dark nuclei 
do occur. Most of the imaginalmuscles, however, appear first as collections of such small cells 
(myoblasts), sometimes associated with the histolysing larval muscles but often seemingly 
independent of such. Some difference in the degree of change and the period at which such 
change takes place depends upon the part of the body concerned, that is whether it is the 
musculature of the head, the thorax or abdomen that is being considered. 
The head muscles are almost entirely new, not only in respect to separate origin, but, 
with the great changes in the head, even the same muscle where it has been carried through 
from larva to adult has changed relations to the general structure of the parts (see Fig. 45 (1) 
and (2), where the parts in an early and a late stage of the pupa are shown). The changes 
in the head musculature have been very fully dealt with by Thompson in Culex, the changes 
in AL;des aegypti being not noticeably different. Thompson notes that all the muscles of 
the head continue intact as in the larva up to the eighth or tenth hour when histolysis 
occurs. This brings about the final disappearance of the majority of the larval muscles, but 
certain muscles are reformed into imaginal muscles. In this case the large reticular nuclei 
374 
OQ2mm. 4 
I I 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 Figure 46. The pupa. Muscular system. 0-02mn;l. II 
Larval muscle type. A, longitudinal view of a muscle band. B, transverse section of a group 
of larval muscles. 
Transverse section of a tubular muscle showing peripheral ring of muscle substance and 
centrally situated nuclei. 
Three fibres of same more highly magnified, showing arrangement of fibrillae in radiating lines. 
Longitudinal section of three muscle fibres of tubular type. 
Three fibres of another type of imaginal limb muscle with peripherally placed nuclei. 
Sagittal section of dorsal area of thorax of early pupa showing developing masses of indirect 
wing muscle. The masses have not yet directly attached themselves to the hypoderm but are 
indirectly attached to this by areas of tonofibrillae. 
Portion of same more highly magnified, showing ending of muscle fibres in tonofibrillae. 
Attachment area of portion of a fully matured bundle of wing muscle type. 
A small portion of same, more highly magnified. This is the same magnification as no. 3, 
showing fibres of tubular muscle. Appearance shown at the surface of the muscle band 
suggests sarcolemma, but care has to be taken to avoid confusing tracheal nuclei, for those 
of the sarcolemma. 
Transverse section of muscular bundles of indirect wing muscle. A tubular leg muscle type 
band is shown lying in juxtaposition. 
A portion of 10 more highly magnified. 
375 
THE PUPA 
of the larval muscle fibres become smaller, stain more darkly and lose their reticulated 
character, some becoming histolysed. Large numbers of small, darkly staining nuclei then 
appear, the two sets remaining side by side until the twentieth hour when new contractile 
substance staining with haematoxylin appears and the nuclei take on the imaginal condi- 
tion. Finally the amount of contractile substance increases and the imaginal staining 
reactions are shortly reached. 
The muscles so carried over, as also the larval muscles disappearing and the new imaginal 
muscles formed, are given in Table 22, the numbers and names being those given in the lists 
respectively of larval and adult head muscles. Those numbers in the table given in brackets 
and without accompanying name are larval muscles that are finally histolysed or imaginal 
muscles formed independent of larval muscles. Numbers not in brackets and with the 
name of the muscle are, under the conditions noted above, larval muscles that are carried 
over as imaginal muscles. 
Table 22. Relation of larval to imaginal musculature of the head 
Larval 
(l-10) 
11 Dilators of the salivary opening 
(12) 
13 Posterior elevators of the roof of the pharynx 
14 Lateral pharyngeal 
(15) 
16 Dorsal retractors of the pharynx 
17 Accessory dorsal retractors of the pharynx 
(18-21) 
22 Dorsal dilators of the oesophagus 
23 Lateral dilators of the oesophagus 
(24) 
25 vl I’ (thoracic)? Imaginal 
(1-17) 
18 Salivary muscle 
19 
20 
21 Dorsal retractors of the buccal cavity 
22 Accessory dorsal retractors of the buccal 
23 Dorsal dilators of the oesophagus pump 
24 Lateral dilators of the oesophageal pump Valvular muscles 
Lateral retractors of the buccal cavity 
25 Depressor muscle of the head cavity 
In the thorax the great bulk of the imaginal musculature is wholly new consisting of the 
large indirect wing muscles and those connected with the limbs that have largely formed in 
the imaginal buds. The original larval muscles, however, are still represented in the less 
conspicuous visceral system as described under the imago. 
In the abdomen the relatively massive muscles are retained throughout the pupal stage 
and are only finally replaced by the true imaginal muscles in the imago after emergence. 
Besides replacement of the larval muscles by those of the adult there is also a great change 
in the character of the muscles in the two systems. Further remarks on these systems will be 
found later when the adult musculature is being described. Since, however, it is in the pupal 
stage that the change in character takes place, it will be appropriate to give in the present 
connection some account of the types of muscle fibres. Good accounts of insect muscle 
describing the different types are given by Snodgrass (1925) in his Anatomy and Physiology 
of the Honey Bee; see also Hiirthle (1909) ; Kielich (1918); Jordan (1919, 1920); Weber 
(1933); Studnitz (1935); Tiegs (1955). In the pupa the following types are distinguishable 
in the somatic musculature. 
The larval type (Fig. 46 (1)). All somatic muscles of the larva are of this type. Each muscle 
is commonly a single fibre, often long, thin and even thread-like, rarely massive. Such 
muscle fibres consist of a centrally situated very faintly fibrillated and striated strand of 
muscle substance surrounded by a distinct sarcolemma and between this and the strand 
a clear, often quite voluminous, zone of transparent sarcoplasm in which are spaced at 
376 
MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
intervals large nuclei. The muscle fibre substance stains lightly with eosin and most other 
stains. 
[maginal limb type (Fig. 46 (2)-(5), (10)). This type is seen most characteristically in the leg 
muscles, including those of the coxa and sternal parts. It is also seen in the direct wing 
muscles. It occurs as muscles formed of massive bundles of moderate-sized discrete fibres 
ranging from 10 to 20~ in diameter. Each fibre consists of an outer zone of muscle sub- 
stance with a central sarcoplasmic core in which is embedded a close series of moderate- 
sized nuclei. The fibres in cross-section appear very characteristically as rings with clear 
centre, or, if the section passes through this, with a central nucleus. From this appearance 
they have been termed ‘ tubular muscles ’ (Morison after Rohrenmuskeln of Briinnich). They 
are usually distinctly or even conspicuously striated and show no sarcolemma. The com- 
ponent fibrillae of the muscle substance are very minute, forming radially arranged lamellae. 
Along with this form of muscle are others with fibres of about the same diameter but with 
peripherally situated nuclei. These are often very strongly striated (Fig. 46 (5)). 
Imaginal indirect wing type (Fig. 46 (6)-( 11)). This form of muscle is entirely different from 
those so far described. It appears early in the prepupal stage as sausage-shaped masses of 
very dark-staining substance, so much so that they appear almost as foreign bodies. In 
this early stage they are crowded with lines of very dark-staining bodies resembling flattened 
nuclei. Later thesemasses increase greatly in size and become dark-staining bands stretching 
across the thorax and attached to the hypoderm by broad zones of fine fibrils (tonofibrillae). 
Eventually the dark bands become the imaginal indirect wing muscles. These are massive 
muscles formed of hundreds of fibrillae in the region of 2,~ in diameter and markedly 
striated embedded in sarcoplasm. Among the fibrillae are rows of nuclei and granular 
material. When fully developed such muscle fibres are inserted directly into the cuticle. 
In cross-section they show large polygonal areas formed from cross-section of numerous 
fibrillae, contrasting with the bundles of larger single fibres such as form the leg muscles 
(Fig. 46 (10)). They have been termed fibrous muscles (Morison, 1927) and are considered 
to be each a giant muscle fibre as described in CaZZi$zora (Lowne, 1895; Tiegs, 1955). 
The imaginal muscles of the head are mostly of tubular type, but some, for example those 
of the pharynx and post-pharynx, consist of fine fibrillae and seem to approach in character 
the indirect wing muscle type. The main mass of indirect wing muscle type occurs in, and 
largely occupies, the dorsum of the large mesothoracic segment, but a much smaller mass 
passes between phragmata in the metathorax. 
The muscles in the thorax connected with the legs, as also those in the leg segments, are of 
tubular type. The muscles of the imaginal abdomen still remain of the larval type, that is with 
sarcolemma and large peripheral nuclei, though a few muscles of tubular type are developed 
in the pupal stage. 
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (Fig.47) 
Changes in the nervous system taking place in the pupa and leading to the imaginal 
condition are chiefly those in the brain. Even so the main lines in structure are largely 
followed and the brain of the imago, as will be seen from the figures, is not very markedly 
different to that of the larva. The chief changes are: 
(1) Increase in size in proportion to the head capsule and especially in the volume of 
white medullary substance. 
377 
THE PUPA 
(2) Great increase in size of the optic lobes and chiasmata as the compound eyes grow 
to their full maturity. Actually the total increase in size of the brain is largely due to this 
development of the optic lobes. 
(3) Increased size of the antenna1 nerves arising from the deutocerebrum. At the 
beginning of the pupal period these nerves are relatively small, but later they become 
massively developed as large trunks passing to Johnston’s organ in the basal lobe of the 
antenna. 
PC 
PC , @ arm 
Figure 47. The pupa. Nervous system. 
1 Dorsal view of brain of pre-ecdysis third instar larva. 
2 The same of an immediate post-ecdysis fourth instar larva before the compound eyes have 
shown any degree of development. Same magnification. 
3 Anterior view of brain of advanced fourth instar larva. Same magnification. Reconstruction. 
4 Anterior view of brain of early pupal stage. Same magnification. Reconstruction. 
5 Anterior view of brain of pupa approaching emergence. Same magnification. Reconstruction. 
Lettering : ann, antenna1 nerve ; Ch, optic chiasma ; cp, area of large cells probably representing 
corpora pedunculata of many insects; DC, deutocerebral lobe; Zbn, labial nerve; Zrn, labral nerve; 
mm, maxillary nerve ; 0, optic lobe ; on, optic nerve ; P, pharynx; P’, posterior pharynx ; PC, proto- 
cerebral lobe ; Sg, sub-oesophageal ganglion. 
The shaded and pale areas in 3, 4 and 5 give a general representation of the distribution of 
cortical neurocellular tissue and medullary white matter (neuropile). 
378 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
(4) Closing in of the foramen between the cerebral connectives owing to massive 
thickening of the latter and to reduced size of the pharyngeal canal. 
Disproportionate increase in size of the brain to that of the insect takes place only at the 
beginning of the fourth instar when the first beginnings of the compound eyes occur. In 
the pupal stage further increase takes place as the compound eyes grow, so that from 
stretching as a narrow band across the posterior region of the head the organ in the imago 
largely fills this structure. 
A peculiar point appears to be the small development of the corporapedunculata as these 
are described in many insects. In AEdes aegypti up to the end of the pupal stage only a 
small number of large cells in the protocerebral lobes appear to represent these bodies. 
Changes in the ventral nerve chain are not very great. There is some increase in size of 
the thoracic ganglia with enlargement of the nerves to the now greatly increased leg rudi- 
ments. The first abdominal ganglion which in the advanced larva has moved up somewhat 
towards the thoracic ganglia becomes in the pupal stage more or less incorporated with 
these. A similar change takes place terminally, the ganglion of the eighth segment, both 
in the male and in the female, moving forwards during the pupal period to fuse with that 
of the seventh, so forming a double ganglion. 
The frontal ganglion remains present throughout the pupal period and still receives 
nerves from the tritocerebrum, but these are now much shorter. A visceral nerve chain is 
present much as in the larva. These and related structures as finally present in the imago will 
be described later. 
OTHER STRUCTURES 
The heart, except for its posterior terminal portion, is not essentially different in the pupal 
stage to the description already given in the larva. The corpora allata are still present in the 
late pupa, but are much less conspicuous and appear to be undergoing some degeneration. 
Oenocytes are present in the same situations in the pupa as in the larva. In the advanced 
pupa, however, the small oenocytes are seemingly reduced in size and prior to emergence 
even the large oenocytes appear reduced and many degenerated. According to Hosselet 
(1925) oenocytes occur in the pupa of Culex annulatus in the wing roots. 
REFERENCES 
ADIE, H. A. (1912). Note on the sex of mosquito larvae. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 6, 463-6. 
BAISAS, F. E. (1934). Notes on Philippine mosquitoes. IV. The pupal and certain adult characters 
etc. Philipp. J. Sci. 59, 65-84. 
BAISAS, F. E. (1935). Notes on Philippine mosquitoes. V. The pupal characters of Anophelines 
under the Myzorhynchus series, etc. Mon. Bull. Bureau Hlth Philipp. Islds, 15, 291-339. 
BADAS, F. E. (1936). Notes on Philippine mosquitoes. VI. The pupal characters of Anophelines 
of the subgenus Myzomyia. Philipp. J. Sci. 61, 205-20. 
BALSAS, F. E. (1938). Notes on Philippine mosquitoes. Mon. Bull. Bureau Hlth. Phi&p. Islds, 
18, 175-232. 
BAISAS, F. E. and PAGAYON, A. U. (1949). Notes on Philippine mosquitoes. XV. The chaetotaxy 
of the pupa and larva of Trypteroides. Philipp. J. Sci. 78, 44-72. 
BARRAUD, P. J. and COVELL, G. (1928). The morphology of the buccal cavity in Anopheline and 
Culicine mosquitoes. Ind. J. Med. Res. 15, 671-9. 
BELKIN, J. N. (1951). A revised nomenclature for the chaetotaxy of the mosquito larva. Amer. 
Midl. Nat. 44, 678-98. 
379 
THE PUPA 
BELKIN, J. N. (1952). The homology of the chaetotaxy of immature mosquitoes and a revised 
nomenclature for the chaetotaxy of the pupa. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 54, 115-30. 
BELKIN, J. N. (1953). Corrected interpretations of some elements of the abdominal chaetotaxy 
of the mosquito larva and pupa (Diptera: Culicidae). Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 55, 318-24. 
BELKIN, J. N. (1954). The dorsal hairless setal ring of mosquito pupae (Diptera: Culicidae). 
Pan-Pacif Ent. 30, 227-30. 
BELKIN, J. N., KNIGHT, K. L. and ROZEBOOM, L. E. (1945). Anopheles mosquitoes of the Solomon 
Islands and New Hebrides. J. Parasit. 31, 241-65. 
BRUMPT, E. (1941). Mechanisme d’eclosion des moustiques. Ann. Parasit. 18, 75-8. 
CANTRELL, W. (1939). Relation of size to sex in pupae of AL;des aegypti (Linn.), etc. J. Parasit. 25, 
448-9. 
CAUSARD, M. (1898). Sur le role de l’air dans la derniere mue des nymphs aquatiques. Bull. Sot. 
Ent. Fr. 1898, 258-61. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1933). Fauna of British India: Diptera, vol. IV. The Anophelini. Taylor 
and Francis, London. 
COMSTOCK, J. H. (1920). An Introduction to Entomology. Ed. 2. Comstock Publ. Co., Ithaca, 
New York. 
CONSTANTINIANU, M. J. (1930). See references in ch. XIV (d-e), p. 351. 
CRAWFORD, R. (1938). Some anopheline pupae of Malaya with a note on pupal structure. Gov. 
Straits Settlem. Mal. Adv. Bd. F.M.S. Singapore. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region. Vol. III. Culicine Adults and Pupae. 
Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.) London. 
EYSELL, A. (19 11). Das Schhipfen der Stechmiicken. Arch. Schiffs.- u. Tropenhyg. 15, 273-82. 
GILES, G. M. (1903). On prepupal changes in the larvae of Culicidae. J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 6, 
185-7. 
HOSSELET, C. (1925). Les oenocytes de Culex annulatus, etc. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 180, 399-401. 
HURST, C. H. (1890). The Pupal Stage of Culex. Guardian Printing Works, Manchester. 
HURTHLE, K. (1909). (Structure of striated muscle; Hydrophilus.) Arch. ges. Physiol. 126, 1-164. 
IMMS, A. D. (1907), (1908). On the larval and pupal stages of Anopheles maculipennis Meig. 
J. Hyg., Camb., 7, 291-316; Parasitology, 1, 103-32. 
INGRAM, A. and MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). Notes on some distinctive points in the pupae of West 
African mosquitoes. Bull. Ent. Res. 8, 73-91. 
INGRAM, A. and MACFIE, J. W. S. (1919). The early stages of West African mosquitoes. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 10, 59-69. 
JORDAN, H. E. (1919), (1920). (Structure of insect muscle.) Anat. Rec. 16, 217-45; 19, 97-124. 
JORDAN, H. E. (1920). Studies on striped muscle structure. VI. The comparative histology of the 
leg and wing muscle of the wasp, etc. Amer. J. Anat. 27, l-67. 
KIELICH, J. (1918). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Insektenmuskeln. 2002. Jahrb., Anat. 40, 515-36. 
KNIGHT, K. L. and CHAMBERLAIN, R. W. (1948). A new nomenclature for the chaetotaxy of the 
mosquito pupa based on a comparative study of the genera. Proc. Helm. Sot. Wash. 15, l-10. 
KULAGIN, N. (1905). Der Kopfbau bei Culex und Anopheles. 2. wiss. Zool. 83, 285-335. 
LOWNE, B. T. (1895). The Anatomy, Physiology, Morphology and Development of the Blow-Jly. 
Porter, London. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1920). The chaetotaxy of the pupa of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 10, 
161-9. 
MARSHALL, J. F. and STALEY, J. (1932). On the distribution of air in the oesophageal diverticula 
and intestine of mosquitoes; its relation to emergence, feeding and hypopygeal rotation. 
Parasitology, 24, 368-8 1. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1949). Notes on some oriental mosquitoes. Proc. R. Ent. Sot., Lond., 18, 
219-28. 
MORISON, G. D. (1927). The muscles of the adult honey bee (Apis meZZzfica L.). Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 
71, 395-463, 563-65 1. 
ROZEBOOM, L. E. and KNIGHT, K. L. (1946). The punctulatus complex of Anopheles (Diptera: 
Culicidae). J. Parasit. 32, 95-131. 
380 
REFERENCES 
SEGUY, E. (1923). Histoire naturelle des moustiques de France. Paul Lechavalie, Paris. 
SEN, S. K. (1924). Observations on the bionomics of Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus Skuse. Rep. 
Proc. 5th Entom. Meet. Pusa, 1923, 215-25. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 13, 135. 
SENEVET, G. (1930). Contribution a l’etude des nymphs de Culicides. Arch. Inst. Pasteur AZger. 8, 
297-382. 
SENJZVET, G. (1931). Contribution a l’etude des nymphs d’Anophelines (2nd. Mem.). Arch. Inst. 
Pasteur AZger. 9, 17-112. 
SENEVET, G. (1932). Contribution a l’etude des nymphs d’Anophelines. Arch. Inst. Pasteur AZger. 
10,20454. 
SENEVET, G. (1934). Contributions a l’etude des nymphs d’Anophelines. Arch. Inst. Pasteur AZger. 
12, 29-76. 
SENEVET, G. (1940). Contributions a l’etude des nymphs d’Anophelines. Arch. Inst. Pasteur AZger. 
l&443-7. 
SINTON, J. A. and COVELL, G. (1927). The relation of the morphology of the buccal cavity to the 
classification of anopheline mosquitoes. Znd. J. Med. Res. 15, 301-8. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1925). Anatomy and Physiology of the Honey Bee. McGraw-Hill Book Co., 
New York and London. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1938). The Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York 
and London, p. 388. 
STUDNITZ, G. VON (1935). Umber die Feinstruktur, Kontraktion und Farbbarkeit quergestreifter 
Arthropodenmuskeln. 2. Zellforsch. 23, l-23. 
THEODOR, 0. (1924). Pupae of some Palestinian Culicidae. BUZZ. Ent. Res. 14, 341-5. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
TIEGS, 0. W. (1955). The flight muscles of insects; their anatomy and histology etc. Phil. Trans. B, 
238, 221-348. 
TREMBLEY, H. L. (1944). Mosquito culture technique. Mosquito News, 4, 103-19. 
WEBER, H. (1933). Lehrbuch der Entomologie. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
ZAVREL, J. (1907). Die Augen einiger Dipterenlarven und Puppen. ZooZ. Anz. 31, 247-55. 
381 
XVI 
THE PUPA (cont.) 
(a) PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
DIMENSIONS AND WEIGHT 
Measurements of the length of the cephalothorax of AZdes aegypti pupa are given by 
Cantrell (1939). For the female these were from 1~80-3~00 mm. and for the male 1.45 
2.65 mm. with one exception which measured 2.95 mm. 
Very similar figures were obtained from measurement of the cephalothorax of fifty 
female and fifty male pupae of A. aegypti taken at random on a number of occasions. The 
distance measured was that from the prominent anterior point of the head to the posterior 
bulge of the cephalothorax taken with the pupa lying on its side. This gave for the female 
from 2.32 to 2.75 mm. (mean 2.55 mm.) and for the male from 1.92 to 2.17 mm. (mean 
2.10 mm.), the proportion of female to male being 1.21. The maximum transverse 
diameter of the thorax in a well-nourished female pupa was about 1.8 mm., whilst that 
for the male was about 1.4 nun. 
The mean weight of some hundreds of pupae taken on different occasions was 4*73 mg. 
for the female and 2.65 mg. for the male, or a ratio of female to male of 1.78. This shows 
the pupa to be about the same weight as the mature larva and considerably heavier than 
the adult mosquito some time after emergence. Starvation pupae may be only about half 
the weight or less of the well-nourished female pupa. Departure from the mean weight in 
the male is not so great. 
The toughness of the outer pupal skin gave an opportunity to make an estimate of the 
surface area of the pupa. For this a female and a male pupal skin were carefully broken up 
to give fragments which when mounted in gum would lie flat. Camera lucida drawings of 
the fragments were then made at a magnification of x 50 and tracings of these placed over 
squared paper and the areas determined. The result gave an area of 17.29 mm.2 for the 
female and of 12.36 mrn2 for the male, or a proportion of female to male of 1.40. For the 
female therefore the proportion of area in mm. 2 to weght in mg. was 17.29 to 4.73 or 
approximately 3.6 to 1, as against 6 to 1 for a cube or 3 to 1 for a sphere. For the male the 
proportion was 4.5 to 1. 
Some interest attached to the weight of the pupal cuticle, which in the female particularly 
is of considerable thickness. The weight of 100 female pupal cast skins dried overnight at 
room temperature after blotting off excess fluid was 27 mg. or a mean weight per pupa 
of 0.27 mg. The cast pupal skin therefore weighs about 4 per cent of the pupal weight. The 
weight is also about ten times that of the cast skin of the fourth instar larva. 
382 
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND VOLUME 
In contrast to the larva the pupa is hydrostatically lighter than water and can only maintain 
itself below the surface by active diving movements. Observations on carefully chloroformed 
pupae made at 14” C. with different mixtures of alcohol and water gave the following 
values for specific gravity : 
Female (dark) 0.982 
Female (white pupa) O-982 
Male (dark) o-977 
The specific gravity as determined from weight and volume as determined by displace- 
ment (see ch. VI) was somewhat lower as shown below, the mean volume being 5.60 mrn3 
and the mean weight of the pupae tested 4.96 mg., giving the mean sp.gr. as O-905. 
Three white female pupae 
Five grey female pupae 
Four advanced female pupae Weight Volume 
(mg.1 (mm.3) 
15-l 18.3 
23.3 25.3 
21-l 23-6 Specific 
gravity 
O-825 
o-921 
0,894 
ORIENTATION AND HYDROSTATIC BALANCE 
The respiratory trumpets of the pupa of A. aegypti are tubular in their basal portion and 
rather broadly trough-shaped in their apical third. The edges of the trough when in contact 
with the surface film are expanded, leaving a considerable area open. The inner surface is 
also markedly hydrophobic and has the power when submerged to retain a comparatively 
large bubble of air. In addition to the trumpets the float hairs on the first abdominal 
segment also contact the surface tim. Thus the film is broken by the comparatively large 
hydrophobic surface of the trumpet openings and behind this by the two small contacts 
by the float hairs. 
As already noted it is the air cavity beneath the cephalothorax which is mainly responsible 
for the pupa’s buoyancy and this also plays a part in giving a correct fore and aft orienta- 
tion to the pupa by which when at the surface its trumpets are suitably disposed. It 
would appear, however, that with this flotation centre placed low down an unstable condi- 
tion must exist and according to Manzelli (1941) it is the tips of the trumpets held by surface 
tension which enables the pupa to keep its balance. If the surface tension is reduced, the 
pupae turn on their side, the top of the pupa being the heavier part. Manzelli also notes 
that the trumpets normally hold a bubble of air and that they are folded back by muscular 
action to prevent this being displaced. As already noted, the trumpets are much constricted 
at their base and have a kink in this position that may in certain positions act as a valve 
cutting off connection between their cavities and the general tracheal system. 
The effect of lowered surface tension is the reason why certain substances have a lethal 
effect on pupae. It is due also to the attachment of their respiratory trumpets to the surface 
film that pupae in a vessel tend to collect and lie up at the edge of the water against the 
sides of the receptacle. The reason for such a position is that when a pupa comes within a 
certain distance of the edge its trumpets are drawn up the slope of the meniscus by flota- 
tion until the pupa touches the glass. Pupae rising in the body of the fluid are not so 
affected. But as pupae are constantly liable to dive sooner or later, most get drawn to the 
edge where they tend to rest more quietly. 
383 
THE PUPA 
(b) THE PUPAL CUTICLE 
In contra-distinction to the thin and delicate cuticle of the larva, other than that of the 
head and the siphon, the hardened pupal cuticle is thick and strong and highly resistant to 
loss of water by desiccation and to the action of chemicals. That this is due to some cause 
over and above that dependent on a thick and strongly tanned cuticle is shown by the fact 
that pupae, while extremely resistant to bleaching with chlorine, are readily bleached after 
dipping for a few seconds in chloroform. This applies also to diaphanol. Untreated pupae 
will remain for long periods in diaphanol without bleaching, but are bleached at once 
after dipping in chloroform, thus differing from most insect cuticle which is rapidly bleached 
in this reagent. 
That this property of resistance is due to a waxy substance within or on the cuticle 
receives confirmation from the fact that pupal skins washed in distilled water, dried and 
allowed to remain in chloroform yield on evaporation of this a fatty or waxy substance the 
melting point of which is approximately 52-53” C. This substance forms 2.67 per cent of 
the weight of the dried cast pupal skin. In a thin layer after evaporation from chloroform 
it shows clumps of material which give bifringence with polarised light. 
. The newly emerged pupa is a pure dead white, the only dark parts being the float hairs 
on the first abdominal segment, which on the white pupa show up to the naked eye as two 
minute black puncta towards the base of the abdomen. The following are changes of 
colour which take place by the times noted : 
30 minutes No longer pure dead white 
45 minutes Distinctly a greyish tinge 
60 minutes Grey 
90 minutes Dark grey with pale abdominal bands 
120 minutes The usual dark appearance of the pupa 
A more precise determination on twenty-three pupae observed at 28” C. from time of 
emerging from the larval skin is as follows: 
Colour change 
Time in 
minutes 
5 
15 
30 
45 
60 
120 I A 
\ 
Dead Not quite Light Dark Dorsum 
white white grey grey black 
22 1 - - - 
20 3 - - - 
12 9 2 - - 
- 19 4 - - 
- - - 23 - 
- - - - 23 
At 28” C. any pure white pupa may safely therefore be taken as on the average not more 
than 15 minutes from casting of the larval skin, a fact which may often be useful in making 
observations on pupae at stated times from emergence. 
The colour of the darkening pupa cannot, like that of the egg, be described as blue, 
though the grey is of a character rather suggestive of that colour and has no element of 
yellow or red in it. The respiratory trumpets are, however, in conspicuous contrast, being 
yellow turning brown. The large compound eyes are red, but the ocelli are from the be- 
ginning black. The parts first showing darkening are the scutum, postnotum and halteres 
with an ornamental pattern on the first abdominal segment (Fig. 42 (7)), the basal portions 
of the abdominal segments II-VI and fainter effects on the wings and some leg segments. 
384 
THE PUPAL CUTICLE 
White pupae broken up in water with a few crystals of pyrocatechol show the charac- 
teristic tomato red, indicating presence of polyphenase. Under such treatment the paddles 
soon show up pink and also the pupal wings. Later the same tint is seen in various parts 
of the pupal cuticle, head, thorax, antenna1 bases, etc. This colour reaction indicates that 
polyphenase is the enzyme concerned in the reaction leading to the darkening of the pupal 
cuticle, the ferment present in the insect’s haemolymph acting as shown by Pryor (1940) 
through the liberation of polyphenols, which acting upon the protein in the cuticle give 
rise to darkening and tanning characteristic of the sclerotisation (so-called chitinisation) 
of insect cuticle. The darkening in this case is independent of light as it takes place in much 
the same time whether the pupa is exposed to light or kept in the dark. 
As the time of emergence approaches the pupa becomes of a dull sooty black in contrast 
to the younger pupae, which retain throughout a certain amount of light coloration in the 
abdominal banding and under-surface of the body. This final darkening is not due to 
change in the pupal cuticle, but to the black scaling of the contained imago showing 
through. Such pupae within a short time will undergo emergence, the colour change 
being a useful guide to the choice of specimens for observing emergence. 
(c) BEHAVIOUR AND VIABILITY 
BEHAVIOUR 
When disturbed the pupa, like the larva, dives. But owing to their great buoyancy they can 
normally only maintain themselves below the surface by a succession of dives produced by 
strokes of the abdomen with its terminal paddles. The result of a stroke by the paddles is 
to tilt the cephalothorax forwards and downwards and progression consists largely of a 
series of U-shaped dives which carry the insect some distance horizontally as well as down- 
wards. Whether the power of the stroke is obtained by extension or flexion of the abdomen 
is not easy to ascertain by observation. The former, however, would seem most likely since 
movement is forwards. Rising is mainly passive. 
Owing to the great buoyancy of the pupae it is only by swimming in this fashion that 
they can keep beneath the surface. Nevertheless, by a succession of small strokes they can 
remain down for some minutes and often more or less in a stationary position. Very 
occasionally the pupa becomes anchored by its paddles or trumpets to some particle on the 
bottom or inequality on the side of the vessel. This, however, is unusual in A. aegypti in 
captivity though common in nature with the pupae of some species. 
Very noticeable features in the behaviour of the pupa are, as with the larva, negative 
phototropism and sensitiveness to vibrations. The pupa is, however, less responsive to all 
these forms of stimulus than the larva, and it is possible by regulating the intensity of the 
tap given to the vessel in which they are contained to cause the larvae to dive whilst the 
pupae remain at the surface, a fact often made use of when collecting pupae free from larvae 
for experiment. 
RESISTANCE TO SUBMERSION AND DESICCATION 
Da Costa Lima (1914) found that pupae showed little resistance to prolonged submersion. 
Owing to the relatively thick and impervious cuticle the pupa is unlikely to be able to make 
any use of dissolved oxygen. Further, pupae when submerged tend to lose buoyancy owing 
25 385 CH 
THE PUPA 
to the using up of oxygen by their tissues, and when submerged beyond a certain time they 
may become too heavy to rise to the surface, efforts to do so only driving them further 
downwards. Carter (1923) notes that larvae of A. aegypti will live 2 or 3 days under a film 
of petroleum, but not the pupae. Kalandadse (1933) found pupae began to die under a 
glass sheet excluding air from the water in 2 hours, whereas fourth instar larvae began to 
die only after 7 hours. As previously noted first instar larvae under such circumstances 
may live for days. Macfie (1923 a) found that, in a tube, larvae will descend on tapping the 
tube to a distance of as much as 8 feet. Pupae, on the other hand, showed anxiety to return 
at beyond 3-34 feet, and one at 7 feet sank to the bottom. 
Pupae, however, have considerable powers of resistance to desiccation and when removed 
from water may remain alive and active for some hours. Larvae, on the contrary, unless 
kept moist, quickly begin to dry and die. Howard (1913) notes that pupae of A. aegypti 
can live and eventually emerge on moist blotting paper. Young (1922) found that pupae 
still hatched when dry twenty-four hours from pupation. Gillett (1955) utilises this pro- 
perty in isolating adults for experiment. 
LETHAL EFFECT OF HIGH AND LOW TEMPERATURE 
Bacot (1916) notes that at 40” F. (4-4” C.) pupae of A. aegypti become dormant at the 
surface of the water. They resume activity at 60” F. (156” C.). 
My own observations on the lethal effect of low temperature on the pupa are but few. 
At 7” C. pupae are immobilised or capable of very feeble movement. Emergence does not 
take place. At 17” C. pupae are active, but time of emergence is greatly prolonged or does 
not take place. At 18” C. emergence takes place with a pupal period of from 116 to 
120 hours. 
For the lethal effect of high temperature Macfie (1920) gives the following : 
Immediate effect 
44” C. or higher 
42-43” C. 
41” c. Pupae inert and lying at surface 
Similar effect but slighter. 
No deleterious effect. 
Final effect 
50” c. No recoveries. 
45” c. Seldom survived above this temperature. 
44” c. Seldom showed permanent ill effects. 
Table 23 gives the results of exposing female and male pupae of A. aegypti to different 
temperatures for various periods and observing the immediate effect and eventual mortality 
as shown after 24 hours. 
It will be seen from the table that the temporary immobilising effect from which many 
pupae may recover, as also the completely lethal effect, is practically identical for the two 
sexes. Another interesting feature is that, for immobilising effect, time of exposure is not 
very important, the effect for different periods of exposure beginning to be pronounced 
always at a temperature of 43” C. Time of exposure is more important with higher tempera- 
tures. The critical lethal temperature for 3 minutes exposure is 48” C., that for 15 minutes 
45” C. and that for 30 minutes 44” C., though from the data obtained there would seem to 
be little difference for exposures over this. 43” C. was still not completely lethal, even at 
60 minutes exposure. For a short exposure, therefore, that is for periods from a few minutes 
386 
BEHAVIOUR AND VIABILITY 
to an hour, lethal temperature for the pupa, taking this as producing 100 per cent mor- 
tality, is from 44 to 48” C. Lethal temperature for the pupa is therefore within a few 
degrees of that for the larva. In this case pupae from a culture were added directly to water 
at the temperature noted. For periods much over those noted a lower temperature would 
probably be lethal. According to Davis (1932) a temperature of 36” C. greatly shortens 
life. 
Table 23. Lethal eflect of high temperature on pupae of 
A&des aegypti 
Females Males 
* < \ r * \ 
Tempera- Immobile Immobile 
Exposure ture No. at end of Dead at No. at end of Dead at 
(min.) (” C.) exposed exposure 24 hours exposed exposure 24 hours 
3 42 
3 43 
3 44 
3 45 
3 46 
3 47 
3 48 
3 49 
15 40 
15 41 
15 42 
15 43 
15 44 
15 45 
15 46 
15 47 
30 40 
30 43 
30 44 
60 39 
60 40 
60 41 
60 43 16 
7 
17* 
12* 
11* 
13* 
14t 
12t 
11 
11 
12 
8* 
24* 
13t 
7t 
11t 
4 
:; 
11 
10 
5 
41* - 
- 
13 
12 
11 
13 
14 
12 - 
4 
1 
3 
7 
14 
12 
- - 
1 1 
1 1 
8 3 
14 11 
13 13 
7 7 
11 11 
- 
30 
48 
- 
2 
- 
38 - 
2 
48 
- 
- 
- 
30 - 
* Indicates over 50 per cent immobilised. 11 2 
14 3 
20* 15 
12* 12 
25” 23 
18* 18 
117 11 
19t 19 
13 1 
15 1 
11 4 
10* 10 
34* 34 
8t 8 
16t 16 
1st 18 
14 - 
zz; 22 50 
27 2 
21 2 
9 2 
36* 33 
t 100 per cent killed. 2 
- 
4 
2 
9 
10 
11 
19 
1 
2 
2 
1 
11 
8 
16 
18 
- 
2 
48 
- 
4 
- 
19 
EFFECT OF SALT AND CHEMICALS 
The pupa, unlike the larva, is almost entirely closed in an impervious cuticle and is remark- 
ably resistant to chemicals other than vapours and gases. Nevertheless, as previously 
noted, this resistance is not entirely a matter of thickness and hardness of cuticle and seems 
to be due to a considerable component of waxy substance on or within the cuticle. 
Macfie (19 14) notes that in 2 per cent salt (that is, about two-thirds the concentration of 
sea water) pupae of A. aegypti continue to hatch out for the first 2 days, after which all are 
dead. The same author (19 16) noted that pupae of the same age always hatched out earlier 
in saline solutions than in tap water and that development is hastened by a low concen- 
tration of salt, for example 0.49 per cent. Woodhill (1942) notes that pupae of A. aegypti 
were not affected by salinity of 3-5 or 7 per cent. Curiously enough, Macfie (1923 b) notes 
that l-2 per cent lithium chloride not only killed larvae but also pupae within 4 hours. 
Pupae may remain alive for many hours in 70 per cent alcohol, 10 per cent formalin or 
other usual fixatives. Chopra, Roy and Ghosh (1940) found that pupae of A. aegypti were 
less readily killed by pyrethrum scattered in powder on the water than were larvae. Hoskins 
387 25-2 
THE PUPA 
(1932) found pupae of Culex tarsalis much less susceptible than the larvae to acid and basic 
solutions of sodium arsenite. 50 per cent of pupae died in an exposure of 26.5 minutes 
to 0.03 molar solution of arsenite at pH 5, but continuous exposure for 402 minutes was 
necessary for full effect. 
In contra-distinction to chemicals which act, if at all, by penetration of the cuticle are 
those lethal through their effect in lowering the surface tension of the fluid and so, as 
already noted, causing the pupae to lose attachment of their respiratory trumpets to the 
surface film. Conspicuous among such substances is soap. Senior White (1943), working 
with saturated bar soap solution, found a dilution of l-50 in tap-water lethal to pupae in 
45 minutes. l-100 dilution took over 2 hours and at l-400 pupae progressed to emergence. 
In distilled water l-500 killed in 135 minutes, emergence taking place at l-750 or over. 
Manzelli found soap, l-100, killed in 3 minutes. l-400 did not kill in 4 hours. A patent 
wetting substance, sanlomerse, at l-4000 reduced surface tension to half. Other effects 
of the lowered surface tension were that adults alighting on the water sank, as also did 
egg-rafts. Russell and Rao (1941), working with the pupae of Anopheles, also found soap 
lethal to pupae. 
There would seem no reason why pupae should be especially resistant to gases and 
vapours. Williamson (1924) found that chlorine in high but undetermined amount main- 
tained for 3 minutes killed all larvae and pupae. See also Macfie (1916). 
(d) EMERGENCE 
DURATION OF THE PUPAL PERIOD 
For the duration of the pupal stage of Agdes aegypti Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond 
(1903) give 30-50 hours ordinarily and 3-4 days at 22” C., Mitchell (1907) l-5 days, 
Newstead and Thomas (19 10) 2-3 days at 23” C., Howlett (1913) 2-3 days, Bonne-Wepster 
and Brug (1932) 2-3 days in a tropical climate. De Meillon, Golberg and Lavoipierre 
(1945) found the mean time for emergence of 1000 pupae was 2.4 days (57 hours), 97 per 
cent emerging within a range of 47-69 hours. Shannon and Putnam (1934) give for the time 
between pupation and emergence at 23-27” C. 45 hours for males and 60 hours for females. 
The data given in the accompanying table (Table 24) were obtained for pupae which 
had been either timed from observed pupation (39 pupae) or used as pure white pupae 
(241 pupae). As already noted, pupae remain pure white only for an average period of 
Tempera- 
ture 
(” c.> 
29 
28 
26 
23 
18 
7 
29 
28 
26 
23 
18 
7 Table 24. Time from pupation to emergence at d@erent temperatures 
Number emerging at different hours 
I A , Mean 
Sex 
F. 
F. 
F. 
F. 
F. 
F. 
M. 
M. 
M. 
M. 
M. 
M. Number 
observed 43 
43 40 
55 - 
31 - 
12 - 
6 - 
38 37 
32 - 
9 - 
31 - 
7 - 44 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 45 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 46 
- 
14 
- 
- 
- 
- 
13 47 48 49 
- - - 
30 11 - 
1 5 12 
- - - 
Failed to emerge 
- - - 
15 4 - 
8 - - 
Failed to emerge 50 
- 
- 
10 
- 
- 
- 52- 116- in 
51 69 120 hours 
- - - 43 
- - - 47 
3 - - 49 
- 12 - 60 
- - 6 118 
- - - 43 
- - - 47 
- - - 47 
- 31 - 60 
- - 7 118 
388 
EMERGENCE 
15 minutes, a period which may be neglected without much error when giving time to 
emergence in hours. 
The curious point is that though the period of larval development in the male is about 
one day shorter than in the female the much smaller male pupa takes almost exactly the 
same time to reach emergence as the female. It has already been observed that males emerge 
in cultures before the females. This, however, appears to be the result of a shorter period of 
larval development; the pupal period is not shorter. At 17” C. pupae do not develop 
further; or if emergence takes place at all it is greatly delayed. At temperatures below 
17” C. it does not occur. At some temperature between 17” C. and 7” C. pupae are 
immobilised and in time killed. 
THE ACT OF EMERGENCE (Fig.48) 
The emergence of the imaginal mosquito from the pupal skin has been a subject of interest 
as far back as the time of Reaumur (1738) who describes the act. See also Meinert (1886) ; 
Causard (1898), whose reference to the part played by air in emergence of aquatic nymphs 
has already been noted ; Hurst (1890), whose classical papers on pupal structure have also 
been noted; Eysell(l905,191 l), who appears to have been the first to record that air enters 
under the pupal cuticle at separation of the pupal trumpets and a translation of whose 
account is given by Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) ; Brother (19 13), who describes the act 
in Culex as one of the object lessons of the small aquarium; Seguy (1923), who gives three 
pages of description of the act; Sen (1924), who describes the swallowing of air and move- 
ments of the pharyngeal pump during the act; MacGregor (1927), who gives a detailed 
account of emergence of A. aegypti; and lastly the important papers by Marshall and Staley 
(1932) and Brumpt (1941) on which detailed knowledge of the mechanics of the processes 
concerned largely rests. 
The general features of the act of emergence are well described in the following trans- 
lation of a description of emergence of A. aegypti by Eysell(l911) given by Howard, Dyar 
and Knab. 
The abdomen straightens steadily and is completed in 10 to 15 minutes. Air meanwhile appears 
between the imago and the pupal skin. The anterior parts of the cephalo-thorax are then raised 
by a powerful jerk so that the pupa is now touching the surface of the water in front with the 
dorsal part of the pro- and meso-thorax, in the middle with the trumpets and behind with the 
end of the body. A split now occurs in the middle line of the cephalo-thorax exposing the dry 
surface of the imaginal dorsum. By jerks the split is widened and two transverse slits are added 
on each side and after the pupal skin has receded about ten times the thorax in its entire width is 
exposed. The scutellum, the stretched neck and vertex of the strongly bent down head next appear. 
Jerks now cease and the insect emerges with steady ghost-like motion. When the head is born the 
antennae first become free from their sheaths, then the palpi and proboscis are drawn from their 
sheaths. The last segment of the pupal skin is now filled with air. The head is raised, the antennae, 
palpi and proboscis extended and the first legs withdrawn by bending the knee-joints and later 
the joints of the feet in a plane with the body axis. After the first legs the middle legs are similarly 
extracted. The front and mid legs are now extended and the tarsal joints laid gently on the water. 
The body is now firmly supported and the hind legs are withdrawn. The legs are disengaged 
independently of movements of the body, being extracted from their sheaths in pairs by repeated 
very short movements. Finally the wing tips and abdomen become free. The entire process is 
completed within a few minutes. 
The following are some further observations on emergence in A. aegypti as seen under 
the low-power microscope. The first indication that emergence is approaching is change in 
389 
THE PUPA 
the colour of the pupa from a greyish black to a deep sooty black, the result of the black 
scales of the adult showing through the pupal cuticle and adding to the already dark colour 
of the pupa. Light patches on the abdomen also become visible from the pale scales on the 
abdomen of the imago showing through, and also the dark-scaled veins on the wings are 
very noticeable. The bubble at the angles behind the bases of the wings becomes more 
conspicuous and air is seen collected about the base of the breathing trumpets. At this 
time there are often seen some small, but definite, jerky movements of the body, apparently 
unconnected with movements of the abdomen, the nature of which is uncertain. 
The exact sequence of the events that follow at this time seems to vary somewhat, but an 
early first indication that emergence is imminent is that the abdomen from being bent under 
the cephalothorax gradually becomes extended so that the paddles become visible from 
above. Air may be seen at this stage not only at the bases of the trumpets but below this. 
It may even sometimes be seen at the sides of the abdomen before further happenings occur. 
Usually, however, before air under the cuticle is at all extensive a white line suddenly 
appears along the top of the crest on the scutum. This is caused by air apparently entering 
into small fissures either within the substance of, or under, the cuticle of the ridge. The line 
at this time is not an actual split. Without further warning a sudden movement of violent 
Figure 48. The pupa. Pupation and emergence. 
Fourth instar larva of Culex pipiens killed during pupation at time of withdrawal of tracheal 
trunk sections. Camera lucida drawing. a, median flap of head capsule pushed forwards by 
the head of the emerging pupa. Behind the head are indications of membranous cuticle 
slipping backwards and just about to expose the respiratory trumpets; b, portion of tracheal 
trunk dragged from metathorax; c, portions of tracheal trunks respectively from the first, 
second and third abdominal segments, that is the section anterior to their present position; 
d, wrinkled cuticle and sections of tracheal trunks from segments four, five and six collected 
at terminal portion of abdomen; e, tracheal trunks drawn out from seventh and eighth 
abdominal segments attached to siphon. 
Head and thorax of fourth instar larva of Aedes aegypti at commencement of pupation 
showing air collected about the respiratory trumpets. Dorsal view. Lettering as for 3. 
The same at a later stage showing air collections under the cuticle at various places. a, ventrally 
at front of thorax; b, in space left between limb loops on ventral aspect of thorax; c, air 
collections under pupal wings. Ventral air space; d, ventrally at front of abdominal segments. 
Horizontal section of pupa at level of first abdominal spiracles showing relation of pupal 
sheaths of mouth-parts, legs, wings and halteres. The dotted lines indicate imaginal parts 
lying within the sheaths. The lateral extensions of the ventral air space up to the region of the 
halteres, etc. are shown in black. 
The same at a more ventral level and passing through the main portion of the ventral air space. 
Showing the way in which the sheaths of the mouth-parts and legs terminate to form the floor 
of the ventral air space. 
Lateral view of pupal skin with emerging imago, showing the boat-like character of the pupal 
cuticle and position of the imago just prior to withdrawing the proboscis and legs. The water 
line is arbitrarily indicated. Camera lucida drawing. 
Lettering : an, antenna; cx’, cx”, cx”‘, coxae of first, second and third legs; fe’, fe”, fe’“, femora 
of first, second and third legs; ha, imaginal haltere in pupal sheath; I, cut-across base of abdomen; 
L, labium and other mouth-parts in their pupal sheaths; sp, spiracle of first abdominal segment 
opening into the ventral air space; tb’, tb”, tb”, tibiae of first, second and third legs; ts’, ts”, ts’“, 
tarsi of the same ; va, ventral air space; va’, lateral extensions of same; W, pupal wing sheath 
with developing imaginal wing. 
390 
\ 
’ t- ‘-. r’ 
* .’ 
1 
1 05mm. , 4 5 
I 05mm. , 6 
Figure 48 
391 
THE PUPA 
extension of the pupal body now occurs bringing the abdomen completely level with, or 
even concave to, the surface, the cephalothorax at the same time being tilted backwards so 
that the antennae now become conspicuous at the front of the pupa as this is viewed from 
above. This almost convulsive movement of extension would appear to be an important 
stage in emergence, but its exact significance or implications are not clear. It is usually 
almost immediately after this that a median crack appears along the white line on the 
crest. Once this happens emergence is usually quickly completed. 
The crack rapidly widens, exposing the dry surface of the striped imaginal thorax. Then 
the stretched back of the neck and finally the occipital surface of the bent-down head are 
exposed. Over the lateral regions of the now exposed occiput curious twitching movements 
occur, evidently due to contraction of muscles taking origin in this situation. These may be 
lateral or dorsal dilators of the sucking pump or, as is thought possible, muscles connected 
with the mouth-parts and engaged in liberating these from their sheaths. Or both may be in 
action. 
Meanwhile air has appeared at the sides of the eighth segment and subsequently other 
segments, and the imaginal abdomen is seen to be exhibiting vermicular movements and to 
be retreating from the pupal cuticle, leaving this distended with air which has rapidly spread 
over the whole abdomen and allowed the scales of the imaginal abdomen to show up 
clearly. At the same time the widening longitudinal split is further supplemented by short 
transverse splits behind the vertical plates and also by the opening up of folds in the pupal 
skin behind the head as previously described when discussing the cast skin of the pupa. 
As the pupal skin more and more retracts, the thorax, scutellum, head and prothoracic 
lobes all emerge to view. 
Now the head is suddenly raised, the antennae, palps and proboscis lifted out and the 
first legs withdrawn as described by Eysell. At this stage the front and mid-legs are more or 
less simultaneously extended and the tarsal joints laid gently on the water. In A. aegypti, 
according to Brumpt, the liberation of the three pairs of legs is almost simultaneous, though 
in some other species the legs are withdrawn successively. The wings, as the insect emerges, 
are drawn out of their sheaths and come to lie folded on the swollen abdomen as this 
leaves the now rigid air-filled pupal skin of the abdomen. 
The pupal skin has now become a rigid floating base on which the insect continues its 
emergence very much as if making use of a small boat. Its body directed upwards like a 
spectre rising higher and higher without apparently any struggle or motive force has been 
a familiar subject for illustration and its slow emergence is certainly one of the curious 
sights in nature. At one stage, that is just before the mosquito places its fore-legs on the 
water, its body projects so far forwards that it appears at any moment to be in danger of 
toppling over (Fig. 48 (7)). But the critical moment passes once the legs are withdrawn and 
placed on the water. The insect, now stably supported, requires only to draw out the hind 
tarsi to be free. 
That the simile of the pupal skin as a small boat, a simile noted by Reaumur, is not after 
all so fanciful is shown by the following observations giving the volume of displacement 
during the act of emergence. 
Volume occupied by the intact pupa 5.48 mm.3 
Volume shortly after emergence began 5.21 mm.3 
Volume during emergence 4.95 mm.3 
Volume when emergence completed 3-00 mm.3 
392 
EMERGENCE 
Since 2.48 mm.3 of water (the difference when the insect moved away) would represent 
about 2-48 mg. weight, this should be about the weight of the emerging adult. The mean 
weight found for the newly emerged adult has been given in another section as 2.91 mg. 
The time taken over emergence varies as does that of the different stages. Timed for a 
number of pupae on a warm stage at 30” C. emergence up to the appearance of the wing 
tips was most commonly completed in from 10 to 12 minutes, but in some cases as soon as 
5 minutes. From the time of the sharp extension of the body to emergence as above was 
rarely more than 2 minutes. These times relate to the female pupa. 
The newly emerged mosquito is at first pale with strongly inflated abdomen. It is at 
first somewhat incoordinate in its movements and weak. But after about 10 minutes it 
can make short flights. Normally, however, it remains on the water. After about an hour it 
is able to fly more or less normally and usually then leaves the water and settles on the 
wool plug or netting at the top of the container or on the sides of this. 
The question has been raised whether mosquitoes following upon emergence drink 
water. Experiments in which the mosquitoes had emerged from pupae in water coloured 
with fuchsin and had been left undisturbed until they left the water voluntarily appeared 
to show that this was not a normal procedure following upon emergence, since in no case 
were traces of colour ever found in any part of the alimentary canal. It is usual for mos- 
quitoes that have died, or become moribund, on the water surface to distend the diverticula 
with fluid. This, however, occurs at any age as an ante-mortem condition and has no special 
relation to emergence. 
Owing to its swollen abdomen the mosquito has much the appearance of one that has 
fed or become gravid. But after a short time the abdomen takes on its usual appearance 
in the unfed insect. A small quantity of faecal matter may be passed at this time and has 
been termed meconium. It represents such remains as there may be of the cast off and un- 
digested gut epithelium of the larval stage. 
As with the discarded skin of the larva at pupation that of the pupa after emergence forms 
important material for the systematist owing to the clearness with which the hairs and 
other cuticular structures are displayed. Methods of preparing the pupal skin for exami- 
nation have been given in chapter xv. 
THE MECHANISMS INVOLVED IN EMERGENCE 
Briefly the mechanisms employed in emergence are as follows. In the first place before 
emergence begins the usual steps leading to ecdysis as already described have been in 
operation, that is ecdysial fluid has been excreted, has dissolved the endocuticle of the pupal 
cuticle and has been absorbed. In some insects, including some aquatic Nematocera, 
absorption of the ecdysial fluid may in itself be a cause of entry of air under the cuticle 
(Wigglesworth, 1942, p. 27). Brumpt does not consider that this is so in the mosquito since 
the imago within the pupal cuticle is already dry before entry of air begins. It is still 
possible that some degree of negative pressure due to absorption of fluid might persist and 
assist entry of air when an opening for this occurs. The fact remains that early in the act 
air can be seen in some situations under the cuticle. Various views of the source of such air 
have been held. Brumpt, who has given special attention to the question, points out that 
the air of the large bubble held between the wings and legs of the pupa (that is the ventral 
air space) lies outside the pupal cuticle and hence cannot be the source of air observed 
under the cuticle. (This may require a little modification as will be seen later.) The swal- 
393 
THE PUPA 
lowed air according to this author must come from that which enters under the pupal skin, 
as suggested by Eysell, at the time when the connections of the pupal trumpets are broken. 
It will be remembered that leading from the bases of the respiratory trumpets on each side 
is a length of dilated tracheal trunk leading to the position of the future mesothoracic 
spiracle of the imago, and that this portion of trunk seems to be entirely a pupal structure 
and is cast off with the pupal skin. Consideration will show that at this time the connections 
where these trunks are attached at the imaginal spiracles must be the only points at which 
the included imago is still attached to the pupal skin, and there would seem to be no diffi- 
culty in these connections being torn through at the commencement of emergence as 
appears to be the case. If they are so torn, air would certainly be able to enter under the 
pupal cuticle, whether from the air in the tracheal trunks as considered by Eysell, or from 
the external air via the respiratory trumpets as maintained by Brumpt. What does not 
follow is that such air is necessarily at once available for swallowing. Air entering at the 
bases of the respiratory trumpets would, to reach the mouth, require to pass through the 
relatively narrow pupal neck, and though this passage-way is not obvious externally it none- 
the-less exists, even if only represented in membrane. The structure of the parts in such 
questions requires to be borne in mind. Air, for example, could not be swallowed, as it 
would be in the emerged mosquito, through the proboscis, since the mouth-parts that will 
eventually constitute the channel for blood or air are at this stage in separate pupal sheaths 
and could not unite to form a channel. The mouth, however, situated high up in the region 
of the clypeus, is so available and if air were present in this region it could conceivably be 
swallowed. Its entry might be facilitated by the tearing of the ventral head membrane by 
dragging of the tentorial bars from their posterior attachments as previously described. It 
cannot even be said with certainty that air could not be obtained from the ventral air space. 
Though the presence of air in this space may appear as rounded bubbles, the space itself 
has many ramifications (Fig. 48 (4), (5)) among the cemented parts, and if membranes are 
torn air might well be made available in unlimited amount from this space. This space too 
is in direct communication with the outer air via the open first abdominal spiracles and the 
tracheal trunks. Even air in the abdomen is not necessarily derived from rupture at the 
base of the respiratory trumpets, since it might well escape from the tracheal trunks through 
the open imaginal spiracles when these are freed from pupal tracheal lining. This might 
explain the early appearance of air in the abdominal segments. That air is eventually 
swallowed and is largely responsible for emergence of the imago is undoubted. There 
remains the issue, however, whether at this early stage it is the swallowing of air which is 
responsible for the split on the thorax and if so what exactly is the source of the swallowed 
air. Marshall and Staley found no air in the diverticula or mid-gut at the time when the 
pupa straightens out, that is a very short time before the split occurs. 
Clearly the crest carries a special line of weakness in the cuticle as is evidenced by the 
admission of air into cracks within or beneath the cuticle at the time the white streak 
appears and often some time before the split follows. According to Brumpt the splitting 
is initiated by a cluster of erect hairs, which at the first appearance of the split appear to 
be in the median line of the imaginal notum, but which in reality, as is seen when the 
imaginal thorax is fully expanded, are situated to the side of this, there being before the 
thorax expands a sulcus between the hairs of the two sides. In Theobaldia and Culex the 
hairs form a tuft. In Aedes aegypti they lie well back on the notum arranged in the sagittal 
plane. 
394 
EMERGENCE 
Once the split on the thorax has appeared emergence is rapidly completed, now mainly 
the result of swallowing air which by causing the abdomen to swell gradually forces the 
imago from the pupal skin. As pointed out by Brumpt it is the dorsal concavity of the 
swollen imaginal abdomen pressed against the resistance offered by the back of the slit 
(incidentally strengthened by the strong metathoracic bar) that causes the emerging 
mosquito to adopt the vertical attitude characteristic of the later stages of emergence. 
In the liberation of the mouth-parts and legs muscular action seems to be the chief motive 
force, the wings being passively lifted out of their sheaths, though they also lengthen, 
presumably from blood pressure. 
The distribution of the swallowed air has been especially investigated by Marshall and 
Staley. In describing the swallowing of air during emergence Howard, Dyar and Knab 
state that this air passes into the diverticula. This, however, is not immediately the case. 
In the freshly emerged insect what was found by Marshall and Staley was a large bubble in 
the mid-gut and no air in the diverticula, as has also been confirmed by me on many 
occasions. Only later is the air passed as small bubbles into the diverticula. Pupae dis- 
sected in the act of straightening out and with air beneath the pupal cuticle had no air 
either in the diverticula or mid-gut. At a somewhat later stage small bubbles were present 
in the oesophagus and mid-gut. Later still the mid-gut was swollen with a large elongate 
bubble extending to the third and fourth and later to the fifth and sixth abdominal seg- 
ments, but there was still no air in the diverticula. During the time following emergence, 
however, air is gradually passed from the gut into the diverticula, which take on the charac- 
teristic appearance of these organs distended with numerous small air bubbles. 
REFERENCES* 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). See references in ch. VI, p. 155. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BROCHER, F. (1913). L’aquarium de chambre. Payos, Paris. 
CARTER, H. R. (1923). (Appendix to Connor and Monroe.) Amer. J. Trop. Med. 3, 19. 
CHOPRA, R. N., ROY, D. N. and GHOSH, S. M. (1940). Action of pyrethrum on mosquito larvae. 
J. Malar. Inst. India, 3, 457-63. 
DA COSTA LIMA, S. (1914). Contributions to the biology of the Culicidae. Observations on the 
respiratory process of the larva. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 6, 18-34. 
DAVIS, N. C. (1932). The effect of heat and cold upon Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti. Amer. J. Hyg. 
16, 177-91. 
DE MEILLON, B., GOLBERG, L. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. (1945). The nutrition of the larva of Ak;des 
aegypti L. J. Exp. Biol. 21, 84-9. 
EYSELL, A. (1905). Die Stechmiicken. In Mense’s Handb. TropenKr. II, 44-94. 
EYSELL, A. (1911). Das Schliipfen der Stechmticken. Arch. Schi&s.- u. Tropenhyg. 15, 
273-82. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955). Mosquito handling. A recent development in technique for handling 
pupae of Aedes aegypti. Rep. Virus Res. Inst. E. Afr. High Comm. 1954-5, p. 24. 
HOSKINS, W. M. (1932). Toxicity and permeability. I. The toxicity of acid and basic solutions of 
sodium arsenite to mosquito pupae. J. Econ. Ent. 25, 1212-24. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1913). The yellow fever mosquito. Fmrs’ Bull. U.S. Dept. Agric. no. 547. Super- 
seded by Fmrs’ Bull. no. 1354, 1923. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. D. and KNAB, F. (19 12). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (19 13). Proc. Gen. Malar. Comm., Madras, 19 12, p. 205. 
* For authors not given here see under references to previous chapter. 
395 
THE PUPA 
KALANDADSE, L. (1933). Materialen zum Studium der Atmungsprozesse der Miickenlarven und 
-puppen und der Einwirkung von Petroleum, Beschattung und Verunreinigung des Wassers 
auf dieselben. Arch. SchzB.- u. Tropenhyg. 37, 88-103. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1914). A note on the action of common salt on the larvae of Stegomyia 
fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 4, 339-44. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1916). Chlorine as a larvicide. Rep. Accra Lab. for 191.5, pp. 71-9. Abstract 
in Rev. Appl. Ent. 5, 47. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1920). Heat and Stegomyia fasciata. Short exposures to raised temperatures. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 14, 73-82. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1923a). Depth and the larvae and pupae of Stegomyia fasciata. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 17, 5-8. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1923 b). A note on the action of lithium chloride on mosquito larvae. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 17, 9-l 1. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1927). Mosquito Surveys. Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, London. 
MANZELLI, M. A. (1941). Studies on the effect of reduction of surface tension on mosquito 
larvae. Proc. N. J. Mosq. Ext. Ass. 28, 19-23. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). See references in ch. I (f), p. . 
MEINERT, F. (1886). De eucephale myggallarver. K. Danske Viedensk. Selsk. 3, 373-493. 
MITCHELL, E. G. (1907). Mosquito Life. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London. 
NEWSTEAD, R. and THOMAS, H. W. (1910). The mosquitoes of the Amazon Region. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 4, 141-50. 
PRYOR, M. G. M. (1940). On the hardening of the ootheca of Blatta orientalis. Proc. Roy. Sot. B, 
128, 378-93. 
REAUMUR, R. A. F. DE (1738). Memoires pour servir a l’histoire des insectes-. MCm. XIII. 
Histoire des cousins. L’Imprimerie Royale, Paris. Vol. IV, pp. 573-636. 
RUSSELL, P. F. and RAO, T. B. (1941). On the surface tension of water in relation to the behaviour 
of Anopheles larvae. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 21, 767-77. 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1943). Effect of reduction of surface tension on mosquito pupae. Indian Med. 
Gaz. 78, 342. 
SHANNON, R. C. and PUTNAM, P. (1934). The biology of Stegomyia under laboratory conditions. 
I. The analysis of factors which influence larval development. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 36, 
185-216. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2. (See also many later 
editions.) Methuen and Co., London. 
WILLIAMSON, K. B. (1924). The use of gases and vapours for killing mosquitoes breeding in wells. 
Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 17, 485-5 19. 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1942). A comparison of factors affecting the development of three species of 
mosquitoes (Aedes (Pseudoskusea) concolor Taylor; Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti Linnaeus 
and Culex (Culex) fatigans Wied.). Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 67, 95-7. 
YOUNG, C. J. (1922). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia calopus Meig. in Brazil. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 16, 389-406. 
396 
XVII 
THE IMAGO 
(a) GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
SYSTEMATIC 
Descriptions of the imago of Ai;des aegypti from the systematic point of view are numerous 
(see ch. II). One of the most detailed of these, including all early published descriptions of 
the species under its different synonyms, is that by Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12, 19 17). 
A more general account with much information is that by Howard (1913) under the title 
‘The yellow fever mosquito ‘, republished in a later bulletin of the same series (1923). * 
Illustrations are also numerous, but many, though accurate as regards markings, do not 
well show the general aspect of the species. One of the most realistic and accurate in every 
respect is the large-sized lateral view of the female given by Soper, Wilson, Lima and Antunes 
(1943). Other good figures are by Martini (1920), who gives lateral and dorsal views; by 
Goeldi (1905) and by Edwards (1932, 1941), both authors giving figures in colour ; and by 
Barraud (1934), who gives photographs of the species and of related forms. Good figures 
are also given by Neumann and Mayer (1914) in their Atlas of human parasites and their 
vectors. 
Recent synoptic tables giving identification characters are given by : Edwards (1941) and 
Mattingly (1952) for African species; Barraud (1934) for Indian species ; Bonne-Wepster 
and Brug (1932) for Indonesian species; and Dyar (1928) for American species. 
EXTERNAL CHARACTERS (Fig. 49 (I), (2)) 
In general appearance and body structure the imago of A. aegypti closely resembles many 
other Culicine species, differing from these chiefly in ornamentation and scale structure. 
Along with most other members of the genus ACdes it differs from mosquitoes of the large 
genus Culex in having the abdomen somewhat pointed and the eighth segment reduced in 
size and largely retracted within the seventh, no pulvilli in connection with the tarsal claws 
and the fore- and mid-claws in the female toothed. 
The head is rather small, globular and largely occupied by the compound eyes, which 
almost meet in both sexes above and below. Springing in front from between these are the 
antennae (an) moderately hairy in the female, plumose in the male. Below these are the 
maxillary palps (mxp) long in the male, short in the female, usually referred to in systematic 
works merely as the palps. Below the palps springing from the snout-like rostrum (ro) is 
the characteristic proboscis (pb) containing the highly modified mouth-parts. The neck is 
largely membranous but with strong lateral sclerites giving it ample support and allowing 
the head to be extended or retracted into the hollow of the prothorax. The thorax is 
relatively very large, accommodating the enormously massive wing muscles and consists of 
* See also descriptions by Theobald (1901), Blanchard (1905), Martini (1920), Bonne-Wepster and Brug (1932) 
Barraud (1934), Edwards (1941). 
397 
THE IMAGO 
pro-, meso- and metathorax with their appendages. These comprise the fore-, mid- and hind- 
legs, the wings and the halteres. The abdomen is composed of the largely unmodified 
abdominal segments I-VIII and the modified terminal segments forming the hypopygium 
(HP) according to sex. All these parts will be described in detail later. But before under- 
taking this considerable task there are certain characters of the species which may suitably 
be first considered. 
As is usual in mosquitoes the male is distinguished from the female by the plumose 
antennae and the longer and more developed palps, which in the male are about as long 
as the proboscis, whilst in the female they are only about one-quarter as long. Though to 
some extent hairy, the male palps in AZdes aegypti are much less conspicuously so than in 
the males of most species of Culex, where they are commonly longer than the proboscis 
and heavily clothed with hairs apically. Contrasted also with the narrow pointed termi- 
nation of the abdomen in the female carrying the small lobose cerci is the conspicuous 
male hypopygium with the large claw-like gonocoxites (claspers). The male also differs 
from the female in having only rudimentary mandibles, no distinct and separate hypo- 
pharynx, narrower wings in proportion to their length and a more developed fringe 
apically, larger tarsal claws and a different ungual formula as noted later. 
Of interest from the biological point of view is the marked and constant difference in the 
size of the sexes, the female being nearly twice the weight of the male and much more bulky 
and robust. The sexes differ also in many points of behaviour, in the absence in the male of 
the blood-sucking habit, in the speed of flight, in the note emitted in the hum and notably 
in the normal length of life. In all data regarding the imago it is necessary therefore to give 
separate valuations for the sexes. The female being so much more important, however, 
as a vector of disease and as an insect suitable for experimental work in the laboratory, 
more attention has naturally been given to its study. Usually, therefore, where no reference 
is made to the sex, an observation may be taken to apply to the female, unless from its 
nature it may be assumed to apply to both sexes. 
ORNAMENTATION (Fig. 49 (1); 55 (1); 59 (4)) 
The general colour effect of the normal form of A. aegypti, as with many related species of 
AZdes, especially in the subgenus Stegomyia, is to the naked eye dark, amounting, especially 
in the darker varieties, almost to black ornamented with white. A good deal of variation 
in this respect occurs, though not usually so conspicuously in the ordinary laboratory 
strains, and darker and paler forms are described (see under varieties, strains and hybrids 
in chapter II). 
The dark coloration is due mainly to the scaling, but the cuticle of both the head and 
thorax and to a large extent that of the legs and wings is dark (fuscous), that of the 
abdomen in the female being, however, light-coloured, though in the male the last few 
segments of the abdomen with the claspers have the cuticle dark-coloured. The cuticle of 
the legs is dark where the scales are dark and light at the white bands. Vividness of the 
markings, both dark and pale, is, however, due mainly to the scaling. Certain of the pale 
markings are silvery, gleaming white in some lights, duller and less conspicuous in others. 
These silvery markings occupy fairly fixed positions and are not usually much subject to 
variation. They are characterised in many cases by a peculiar form of scale described later. 
Other areas of pale scaling, and especially the extent of yellow scaling, are more subject to 
variation and are not usually so vivid. 
398 
Figure 49, Female and male imago of AL;des aegypti. 
1 Female to show ornamentation. See also Fig. 55 (I) (thorax) and Fig. 59 (4) (abdomen). 
The female has fed some time previously and shows partially developed ovaries @ale area 
towards terminal segments). Note also pale area basally due to diverticulum. 
2 Male to show male characters and general imaginal parts. 
Note the plumose antennae, long palps, normal-sized eighth abdominal segment and male 
hypopygium. 
Lettering: Abd, abdomen; an, antenna; cx, coxae ; fe, femora ; Hp, hypopygium ; mxp, maxillary 
* tb, tibia; ts, tarsus; W, wing. palps; pb, proboscis; PI, pleura; ro, rostrum, 
399 
THE IMAGO 
Silvery white patches are present on the tips and dorsal surface of the apical half of the 
palps in the female. In the male there is a patch of white on the dorsal surface near the 
base of the palps, a broad white band in the region of the pseudo-joint and patches of white 
scales at the bases of the two apical segments beneath (Fig. 54 (4)). There are white scales 
on the basal lobes of the antennae in both sexes, but especially marked in the female. In 
the female two small patches of white scales are present on the clypeus, a feature present 
in only one other species of Stegomyia (A. vittatus). Sometimes a few white scales are also 
seen in the male. The proboscis is all dark. 
The head is clothed with flat scales forming a white median band on the dorsum extending 
forwards between the eyes. On each side of this is an area of dark scales covering most of 
the dorsal surface of the head, but white scales extend round the margin of the eyes to the 
ventral surface and cover the lateral aspects of the head except for a lateral dark band. 
Brilliant silvery broad scales form conspicuous patches on the prothoracic lobes and 
below these on each side are white markings forming a double V, one above the other, 
formed by white scales on the propleurae and on the front of the anterior coxae. On the 
dorsal surface of the thorax are the characteristic ‘lyre-shaped’ markings (Fig. 55 (1)). 
The most conspicuous parts of these are the two semilunar white areas on the ‘shoulders’ 
extending back for about half the length of the thorax where each ends in a thin line of 
white or yellow scales passing back to the region of the lateral lobes of the scutellum. 
Between these markings and close to the middle line are two fine lines starting at a small 
white spot on the front of the scutum and passing back nearly to the scutellum where, 
after fusing, they continue along each side of the small triangular bare space which lies 
in front of the scutellum. Laterally on the scutum are patches of diffuse pale scaling 
external to the crescentic marks and a prominent white area further back above the wing 
root. In addition an area’of flat white scaling on the paratergite is visible from the dorsal 
aspect. The general surface of the scutum, especially in the lighter varieties, is covered with 
diffusely scattered light yellowish scales. But the dark cuticle showing through may still 
give a general dark effect. On each lobe of the scutellum are particularly striking patches of 
silvery white scales, * which with those on the pleurae and sides of the abdomen are largely 
responsible for the striking silvery ornamentation of the species. The location of the 
patches on the pleurae will be described later when the pleural sclerites have been indicated. 
Other similar patches are on the coxae. Besides the conspicuous patches on the anterior 
coxae already mentioned, there are two on the outer surface of the mid-coxa and one 
larger area covers much of the outer surface of the hind-coxa (Fig. 49 (1)). 
All the femora are dark on their upper surface, especially towards their apices, and have 
pale knee spots. All are dully pale towards their base and for most of their anterior and 
posterior surfaces. On the anterior surface of the middle femur there is a narrow brighter 
white-scaledline not present on the other legs. The tibiae of all the legs are dark throughout. 
On the fore- and mid-legs there are pale spots at the bases of the first and second tarsal 
segments, usually on the upper aspect only. The hind tarsi have broad basal pale bands on 
all the segments, the pale areas on the last two segments including most of the segment, 
whilst some pale scaling may extend from the pale area at the base of the third segment for 
some distance along the outer aspect of the segment. Sometimes the fifth segment is almost 
or entirely white (Fig. 49 (1)). 
* As in nearly all Stegomyiu there is a small dark spot at the apex of the mid-lobe of the scutellum (Mattingly 
in lit.). 
4oo 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
With the exception of a minute pale spot near the base of the costa the wing veins are 
entirely dark-scaled. The halteres are entirely pale. 
The markings on the abdominal tergites and sternites are liable to some variation, giving 
rise to the different named varieties when such variation is very marked. The markings are 
formed by white, pale or yellow scaling shown up on a black background of black scaling, 
the cuticle being pale and entirely covered by the scaling. The white scaling gives rise to 
basal bands on the tergites of segments II-VI and to silvery spots on the sides of the tergites. 
A small pale spot is present in the same situation on tergite VII which is otherwise usually 
all black-scaled, though a small spot may be present in addition on the sternite. The 
sternites are largely pale-scaled with dark scales laterally from segment III onwards, 
increasing in extent to the ventral aspect of segment VII, which is usually all dark. Within 
these lateral areas of dark scaling are silvery spots matching those on the tergites. Basal 
banding is pale but not silvery and is rather diffuse. On each side of tergite I is a particularly 
prominent white-scale patch. The sternite is pale throughout as is also usually sternite II. 
These appearances are best seen in the distended abdomen, that is in a gorged or gravid 
specimen, the sternal lateral spots often being hidden in the unexpanded abdomen by 
curling in of the tergites, so much so that in the dried specimen even the lateral silvery spots 
on the tergites may not be visible in dorsal view. The pleurae are not scaled and in the dis- 
tended abdomen, being transparent, allow the organs and underlying silvery tracheal vessels 
to be seen. 
Ornamentation in the male is very similar to that of the female, except for the palps and 
the termination of the abdomen. The eighth segment is dark, the sternite (in dorsal position 
due to rotation) having some conspicuous white scales, while the claspers are black. 
SCALE CHARACTERS (Fig.50) 
The scales of mosquitoes are figured as a microscopic curiosity by Hogg as early as 1854 
and more fully described by this author in a later paper (Hogg, 187 1). Hogg refers to Muller 
and Delpino as previously describing them in a German periodical, but I have been unable 
to trace this reference. Scale characters have been extensively used by Theobald in his 
early classification of mosquitoes, and the genus Stegomyia was first separated on such 
characters and it is still distinguished as a subgenus of AL;des by the flat scaling of the head 
and scutellum. 
Scales arise from more or less regularly arranged pit-like depressions on the cuticle, 
rather similar to, but smaller than, those from which hairs and spines arise. Each scale 
consists of a stalk, pedicel, and an expanded flattened apical portion, squame, which is 
invariably marked with striations. Those occurring in mosquitoes are for the most part to 
be classified as (1) flat scales, (2) narrow curved scales, and (3) upright forked scales. Those 
of A. aegypti can be mainly included under these heads. 
Flat scales (Fig. 50 (l), (4)) are most commonly bat-shaped, but may be oval, orbicular or 
triangular. Except in the special silvery flat scales described later the striations are strongly 
marked and parallel, following a straight course independently of the shape of the scale. 
The striations are mostly spaced at about the same interval, usually about 2,~~ whatever the 
width of the scale. In the vestiture scaling of the legs and some other parts up to about 
9 striations may be present, about 5 or 6 being common. In the broader flat scales of the 
head, abdomen, scutellum and pleurae up to 12-15 striations are usual. For the most part 
26 401 CH 
THE IMAGO 
flat scales are abruptly truncated, the cut across the striations giving the terminal margin 
a serrated appearance. Especially where the vestiture scales are small they may be more 
elongate-oval in shape (Fig. 50 (1) A). The pedicel of vestiture flat scales is usually curved or 
bent to allow the squame to lie parallel to the surface from which the scale arises. Such 
scales are spaced at such intervals as to overlap somewhat, the squames forming a sheet- 
like layer with a space between it and the underlying cuticle. Flat scales may be dark, 
giving rise to black ornamentation, or white. Dark scales mounted in balsam retain their 
colour ; white scales become colourless and transparent, and seen in situ in balsam prepara- 
tions of parts are almost invisible except for the pedicels which then have the appearance 
of microtrichae. 
Many of the flat scales giving rise to the more brilliant white spots such as those on the 
pleurae and scutellum and the lateral white spots on the abdomen are peculiar. These 
scales are very broad and when mounted are even more transparent than usual. Their 
striations are finer and branched, and when examined dry under a high power they show 
characteristic dark interference banding (Fig. 50 (4)). Not only do they differ from the 
ordinary white scales in showing branching of the striations, but appear to have striations 
on both surfaces as lines are seen obliquely crossing others. It seems to be clusters of these 
scales that are responsible for the brilliancy of some of the silvery markings that give so 
characteristic an ornamentation to the species. 
Narrow curved scales (Fig. 50 (2)) are crescentic in shape with longitudinal striations which 
conform to the shape of the scale. The number of striations is usually five or six, but some 
broader scales occur in some of the white markings. The scales terminate in a sharp point, 
and the pedicel is not bent but merges gradually into the squame so that an even crescent 
is formed (Fig. 50 (2)). Narrow curved scales may be dark or light, but are commonly 
cream or yellowish. 
Upright forked scales (Fig. 50 (3)) are usually narrow and rather solid in appearance. They 
expand gradually towards the tip and usually show a deep median cleft giving them a forked 
appearance. They are practically restricted in distribution to the dorsum of the head. 
Figure 50. Integumentary structures. 
Flat scales. A, ordinary vestiture scales. B, broader type from head, abdomen or other 
situations specially ornamented. 
Narrow curved scales. 
Upright forked scales. 
Silvery ornamental scales. A, very large scales from pleural silvery patch, showing fine 
striations with branching and crossing; B, the same showing banding due to interference. 
Transverse sections of scales. A, ordinary flat scales; B, different types of ornamental scales ; 
c, upright forked scales. 
Pleural and other membranes. A, section of pleural membrane of abdominal segment showing 
small plates of exocuticle bearing microtrichae. a, plates of exocuticle; b, endocuticle; 
c, epidermis; B, plates as above showing stellate arrangement of microtrichae : abdominal 
pleura; c, portion of abdominal pleura with plates as above usually carrying 4 microtrichae; 
D, neck membrane showing single stout microtrichae arising from the membrane. 
Portion of abdominal sclerite showing usual structures. a, hair-like microtrichae arising 
direct from exocuticle; b, scales; c, spine-like hairs. 
Nos. l-4 are on same scale as shown. 
For text regarding nos. 6 and 7 see section on the integument in ch. XXXI (d). 
402 

THE IMAGO 
In A. aegypti the scales of the proboscis, legs, head, pleurae, wings and abdomen are for 
the most part flat scales, those forming the more conspicuous white spots such as those on 
the thoracic pleurae and sides of the abdomen and on the head and scutellum being usually 
broader than the usual vestiture scales. The more vividly white and silvery spots are largely 
composed of very broad scales of the peculiar type referred to which would appear to have 
the effect of giving extra brilliance. Unlike other parts scaling on the mesonotum consists 
mainly of narrow curved scales. The crescents of the lyre are formed of broader scales than 
usual of this type. The groundwork scales of the mesonotum are not dark but yellow. As, 
however, they are narrow and do not overlap, a good deal of the dark-coloured cuticle 
shows through and gives a general darkish effect to the scutum as a whole. The only 
situation where forked scales occur is forming a row some five or six deep on the occiput 
behind the flat scaling covering most of the head. They show longitudinal striations in their 
upper portion (Fig. 50 (3)). The scaling of the wings is in some degree special and will be 
described later when dealing with these organs. Scaling of the male is not significantly 
different to that of the female. 
In structure the scales show considerable variation as seen in transverse section. The 
ordinary flat scales show a thick lower layer from which even ridges extend. Sometimes a 
delicate upper membrane can be made out, but usually the ridges are free (Fig. 50 (5) A). 
Ridges are sometimes present on both surfaces and various other effects are seen (Fig. 50 
(5) B). Scales from the white areas may show oval bodies embedded in the ridges giving 
them a beaded appearance. Upright forked scales differ considerably from the other 
scales. They show a hollow central cavity surrounded by thick walls with ridges (Fig. 50 
(5) c). Many hairs on the head and in other situations are ridged very like the upright 
forked scales. 
There is a large literature on scales mostly relating to the wing scales of Lepidoptera 
and concerned with colour effects. Short descriptions of scale structure in mosquitoes are 
given by Imms (1938) and by Wigglesworth (1942). A paper by Onslow (1921) gives 
sections of many kinds of butterfly scales, some of them resembling those depicted from 
A. aegypti. Mayer (1897), referring to silvery-white scales, says that these must have 
polished surfaces directed towards the observer, as by reflected light they appear merely 
milk-white. This author also gives four or five pages of bibliography. 
CHAETOTAXY 
Little systematic importance attaches to the chaetotaxy of the imaginal head. Such chaetae 
as are present will be described later when dealing with the head capsule and mouth-parts. 
The chaetotaxy of the thorax and especially of the pleural sclerites is, on the contrary, 
important and has been made use of by Edwards (1932) in classification. But since their 
description requires reference to the thoracic parts these also will be dealt with later when 
these parts are being described. Little importance attaches to the chaetae of the limbs 
or abdomen and these also will be given later. 
404 
THE IMAGO 
(b) ATTITUDE 
ATTITUDE AT REST (Figs.49, 51) 
The resting attitude of the living insect varies somewhat with its condition, especially in 
the female where gorging completely alters its whole appearance and stance. To a large 
extent attitude is dependent on the body shape. It is this which gives to the insect the 
‘hunch-back ’ appearance often ascribed to it. Any change in the stance is, however, chiefly 
due to varying positions taken by the joints of the legs. In the normal resting position the 
three femora of each side are directed upwards and outwards at a slope of about 45” to the 
vertical, the fore- and hind-femora each at about this angle to the longitudinal axis of the 
body respectively forwards and backwards, the femur of the mid-leg being approximately 
at right angles to the body axis, though usually directed a little backward of this. In the fore- 
and hind-legs the tibiae are held at an angle of about 60” to the femora and the tarsi at 
about an angle of 120” to the tibiae so that they lie almost parallel to the surface rested 
upon, though sloping slightly to the clawed tips, which on a vertical surface appear to be 
the only parts in actual contact with the surface. 
Support is normally given mainly, if not entirely, by the fore- and mid-legs, the hind-legs 
being either held in the air, or if held touching the surface make little or no change in the 
attitude when they are lifted. The tips of the fore-legs reach forward to points slightly in 
front of the level of the tip of the proboscis and at some distance lateral to this, whilst the 
tips of the mid-legs complete with these the points of a quadrilateral area somewhat wider 
behind than in front. By this arrangement, and the fact that the legs at their bases arise 
close together, what amounts to an adjustable tripod (or more correctly quadrupod) is 
formed on which the body is slung. In such a position the fore-femora pass up close to the 
antero-lateral margin of the thorax and the tibiae viewed from the side cross the line of the 
proboscis (Fig. 49). The mid-femora in side view cross the line of the wing edge a short 
distance from the base. The hind-femora with the legs raised are brought far forwards and 
commonly near their origins cross the line of the mid-femora to lie internal and anterior 
to these, the tibiae being raised above and held roughly parallel to the wing margins, whilst 
the tarsi are directed upwards with a sweep and often waved about or moved up and down 
by movement of the femora as though from a sense of well-being. 
The body of the insect meanwhile is poised so that the tips of the coxae lie at a distance 
of only about half the depth of the thorax from the supporting surface. The tip of the 
abdomen, as likewise the tip of the proboscis, almost touch the supporting surface when 
this is vertical or horizontal. When hanging from a horizontal surface the hinder end of the 
body is usually further away. By narrowing the femoro-tibia1 angles, thus drawing the 
tibia1 apices and tarsi inwards and so lowering the body, or widening the angle by 
straightening the legs and raising the body, or tilting the body by changing position of the 
legs, a considerable latitude in stance can be brought about. Nevertheless, when resting on 
an even surface the attitude of the unfed insect is nearly always that described. Change is 
associated only with some form of activity, such as feeding or probing, ovipositing, etc. 
Almost invariably on a vertical surface the insect rests with the head directed accurately 
upwards, and if such surface be rotated so as to alter the line of the insect’s body, it will at 
first make small adjustments to counteract this and, if the displacement continues, will 
re-establish its correct orientation. 
405 
THE IMAGO 
In the normal insect the wings when resting are closed and locked in position in relation 
to the thorax and more or less in line with the abdomen, lying over but not touching it. 
When gorged the whole appearance of the insect is changed by the relatively enormous 
distension of the abdomen by the blood meal, the dark blood showing through the trans- 
parent pleural membrane. The abdomen is also swollen when the insect is gravid, though 
not to the same extent. 
Various aspects of the insect as depicted by sketches from life are shown in figure 5 1. Some 
of these have been drawn under the camera lucida, but others, for example the female in 
the act of ovipositing, have been sketched as accurately as possible whilst observing the 
insect. 
The male is much more slender and less robust-looking than the female. But except that 
it tends to rest with the abdomen more raised and the hypopygium turned up, its position 
at rest is much as in the female. 
MOVEMENT 
Though both sexes are usually either flying or in one position at rest, they do at times 
traverse small distances with a rather awkward crab-like walk. The manner of walking 
appears to be as described for most insects (see Imms, 1938; Wigglesworth, 1942), 
namely that the middle leg of one side is moved forwards simultaneously with the fore- and 
hind-leg of the opposite side, the other legs meanwhile supporting the body. A sideways 
movement is also commonly seen, the mid-legs being advanced and a grip taken with the 
claws, the other legs then following. When prodding in search for a place to puncture, the 
insect’s attitude is alert, with the body well raised and movements quick and nervous 
(Fig. 51 (5)). 
(c) BODY SHAPE AND PROPORTIONS 
Curiously enough very few authors, except occasionally as a rough measurement in the 
systematic description, have given any indication as to measurements of the specimens of 
A. aegypti with which they have been dealing. Peryassu (1908) gives length as 3*5-5-O mm. 
for the female and 30-4*5 for the male. Bonne and Bonne-Wepster (1925) give about 4 mm. 
for the male and female. The last-mentioned authors also give as wing measurements 
3.5 mm. for the female and 3-O for the male. Such approximations are, however, of little 
value in comparing for example the effect of various conditions on size of the adult, and 
some more critical form of measurement for recording size is very desirable. 
It is not easy in an insect shaped like a culicine mosquito to find a good measurement 
for body length, and before discussing what is the most desirable criterion for size and what 
Figure 5 1. Attitude. 
Female resting. Dorsal view. 
The same. Viewed from in front. 
Unfed female, resting. Lateral view. 
Recently gorged female. Note the distended abdomen with white lines of stretched tracheae 
over the dark area of ingested blood and the pushing of the pale viscera (Malpighian tubules 
and hind-gut) into the sixth and seventh abdominal segments. 
Alert female intent on feeding. 
Female ovipositing on upright filter paper slip. Note the curiously mobile abdomen. An egg 
will shortly appear extruded at the tip and will be deposited on the paper. 
406 
I \ 
i i 
I I 
2 
I \ / \ I 
I \ 
/ \ _ 
/ \ 6 ‘N. -_ 
Figure 51 
407 
. 
THE IMAGO 
linear measurements are satisfactory and significant, consideration must be given to the 
shape and bodily proportions of the insect as a whole. In Table 25 certain measurements of 
body parts are given. A word may be said on the method adopted in taking those measure- 
ments relating to the proportions of the whole body. One very noticeable feature of the 
insect is that, apart from the moveable legs, the body as a whole including the head and 
proboscis has a certain rigidity. Nor are the parts liable to change greatly except the 
abdomen, which is of different dimensions at emergence, in the gorged and gravid female 
and to a less extent with age and starvation. Advantage has been taken of these facts in 
making certain measurements. 
Table 25. Measurements in mm. of body parts of normal-sized 
Jifth-day unfed female Aedes aegypti 
Measurement Mean Approximate 
range 
Body proportions 
Base line (tip of proboscis to tip of abdomen) 
Perpendicular (top of thorax to base line) 
Tip of coxae to base line 
Tip of proboscis to scale patch 
Scale patch to tip of abdomen 6.57 6.45-6.67 
2.59 2.32-2.75 
0.79 0.54-0.94 
3.48 3.33-3.55 
3.71 3.48-4.06 
Head and proboscis 
Tip of proboscis to clypeus 
Tip of proboscis to occiput 
Width of head 2.13 2*10-2.17 
2.78 2.68-2.90 
O-78 o-75-0.80 
Thorax 
Anterior promontory to posterior border of scutellum 1.49 1.46-1.52 
Base of neck to base of abdomen 1.09 - 
Dorsum to coxae (on perpendicular line) 1.81 1.78-1.81 
Breadth at scutal angles 1.02 1X@-1.04 
Breadth at prealar prominence 1.18 1~12-1.20 
Breadth at wing roots 1.14 1.10-1.16 
Width of scutellum 0.74 0*70-0+30 
Abdomen 
Base to tip 
Greatest width 3.26 3.12-3.48 
0.78 - 
Wings 
Length (excluding fringe) 3.41 3.26-3.77 
Greatest breadth (excluding fringe) 0.86 0.82-0.90 
J-egs 
Femur. Fore 2.07 l-88-2.17 
Mid 2.15 1.96-2.25 
Hind 2.18 2.03-2.25 
Tibia. Fore 2.05 1.81-2.17 
Mid 2.25 2.10-2.32 
Hind 2.33 2.06-2.46 
Tarsus. Fore (l-12; 0.57; O-33; O-21; O-22) 6.54 5.94-6.88 
Mid (l-21; O-65 ; 040; 0.22; O-22) 7.03 660-7.32 
Hind (l-39; l-04; O-85; 0.51; O-36) 8.56 8.00-8.77 
In a carefully chloroformed insect all three legs of one side are snipped off near the base 
with a sharp scissors and the insect allowed to lie on that side on a slide. A tiny strip of 
paper slipped under the remaining legs and made to touch the tip of the proboscis and the 
tip of the abdomen then gives a convenient base line which can be measured, along with 
other proportions, by means of an ocular micrometer scale or camera lucida. Measure- 
ments have in all cases been made on females taken at random from routine standard 
cultures on the fifth day from emergence with access to water but no food. 
408 
BODY SHAPE AND PROPORTIONS 
If, with the insect viewed in profile as described above, a perpendicular be dropped from 
the highest point of the dorsum of the thorax on to the above-mentioned base line, it will 
pass through a particularly prominent patch of white scales on the sternopleuron and 
continuing on will pass through or near to the tip of the anterior coxa enabling the distance 
from the base of the legs to the base line to be measured. Using the scale patch referred 
to, a measurement can also be made from the tip of the proboscis to this spot and from the 
spot to the tip of the abdomen. The second measurement divided by the first will give an 
index or ratio indicating degree of abdominal lengthening. Thus in the unfed insect the 
two measurements are approximately equal, giving an index near 1. Immediately after 
gorging, the index is 156. Also the angle formed by the two lines to fix the bodily con- 
figuration of the insect can be determined. The angle is about 120”. The following are 
remarks on the measurements of the different proportions and parts. 
BODY LENGTH 
The measurement given is that along a base line as described above. It is the same measure- 
ment as would be made between the same two points looking down on the insect. It is not 
a satisfactory measurement for general use in recording size owing to the hunch-back shape 
of the insect, its liability to change as the insect dries and it is very dependent on the condi- 
tion of the abdomen. It is useful, however, for working out the body shape and proportions. 
HEAD AND PROBOSCIS 
The proboscis measured from the tip of the labella to the sulcus separating it from the 
clypeus dorsally is about 2-O mm., which is therefore about the maximum possible thick- 
ness of woven fabric which the insect could penetrate (Christophers, 1947). The head and 
proboscis taken together measure about 3-O mm. 
THE THORAX 
The thorax is in general shape an inverted pyramid with the base (mesonotum) rounded off, 
the closely approximated coxae forming the apex. The two pleurae with the anterior and 
posterior surfaces of the thorax, all of which are roughly flat, form the four sides. The 
wings spring from points about one-sixth of the length of the thorax from its posterior end. 
The legs all rise close together round a point midway between the two mid-coxae, the site 
of selection for the pin point when mounting a mosquito. Some measurements of the 
thorax are given in the table. 
THE WINGS 
The length of the wing has been taken from the base of the costa where this has a pale spot 
and makes a sharp bend or knuckle at the wing root, to the tip of the wing at the wing 
margin, that is excluding the fringe, for which 4-5 per cent of the wing length can be 
allowed if desired. The mean length of the female wing is 35 mm. and for the male 25 mm. 
The male wing is also narrower in proportion than that of the female, the ratio of length to 
width being about 4 to 1 in the female and 4.3 to 1 in the male. 
The wing length appears to be the simplest and most reliable measure for size of mosquito 
in experimental work. As shown later it is roughly correlated with weight, but unlike weight 
409 
THE IMAGO 
is not liable to vary with the condition of the insect. It does not alter appreciably with 
drying or mounting in balsam in which states it can be kept very conveniently for record. 
The wing is most readily detached using a dry specimen. If to be mounted in balsam it 
should be dropped in the first place into xylol and pipetted on to the slide, as otherwise a 
troublesome air bubble is apt to form. It will also prevent detachment of scales. 
The area of the wing has some importance in relation to studies on flight. It has been 
given by Sotavalta (1947) and others for some species of mosquito, and by Sotavalta 
(1952) for A. aegypti, the area for two wings male and female being 2.4 and 5-O mm,2 
Data obtained by the present author for dimensions of the wing are given in Table 26. 
Table 26. Length, breadth and area of the wing* 
Sex 
Female 
Female 
Female 
Male 
Male 
Male Normal forms Large forms? 
7 m 
Measurement No. obs. Mean No. obs. Mean 
Length mm. 42 3.50 14 3.85 
Breadth mm. 19 0.88 - - 
Area mm.2 6 2.28 - - 
Length mm. 34 2.55 - - 
Breadth mm. 33 0.59 - - 
Area mm.2 2 0.98 - - 
* Exclusive of fringe. t Bred at 17” C. Starvation forms 
I A , 
No. obs. Mean 
10 2.52 
10 0.58 
10 0.90 
6 2.22 
6 0.42 
6 0.71 
THE LEGS 
The femora are all almost equal in length, increasing only very slightly in length from before 
backwards, but especially so for the hind-legs. The same applies to the tibiae, which are 
about the same length as the femora. The tarsi of the mid-legs are only slightly longer than 
those of the fore-legs, but in the hind-legs the tarsi are about half as long again, the increase 
being chiefly in the third and fourth segments. 
THE ABDOMEN 
The abdomen in the unfed female some days from emergence is about the same length as 
the wings which just reach to about the level of the cerci. At emergence the abdomen is 
to some extent distended owing to the large air bubble in the mid-gut, and probably also 
to the presence of more fluid and reserves than later. The abdomen is also distended and 
lengthened after feeding and as a result of enlargement of the ovaries, under which condi- 
tions it extends to a greater or lesser degree beyond the tips of the wings when these are in 
the folded position. 
(d) WEIGHT 
WEIGHT OF IMAGO UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS (Tables 27, 28 and 29) 
The only author giving data regarding the weight of A. aegypti imago under different 
conditions appears to be Roy (1936) in connection with the role of blood in ovulation in 
this species. He gives the following results for the weight of the 3-day-old female mosquito 
based on a total of 137 mosquitoes weighed. Maximum 2.32 mg., average 1.32 mg., 
minimum 0.86 mg. As noted by Roy, the weight of the unfed female undergoes consider- 
able diminution in the course of the first 2 days. 
WEIGHT 
Table 27. Reduction in weight of adult Aides aegypti following upon emergence 
Culture of 15. viii. 46 Culture of 7. v. 48 Culture of 7. v. 48 
(females) (females) (males) 
_P_ 
Time from 
emergence 
o-4 hours 
O-24 hours 
19-24 hours 
Second day 
Fourth day 
Fifth day 
Wing 
Weight length 
(mg.) (mm.) 
Culture A* 
1.67 3.19 
1.74 3.15 
1.76 3.08 
1.84 3.12 
1.86 3.26 
1.89 (2) 3.19 (2) 
1.90 3.19 
1.90 - 
1.92 3.26 
1.93 (2) - 
1.95 - 
1.97 3.19 
1.97 - 
1.98 - 
E(2) 3.41 - 
2.01 
2.02 3;6 
2.02 3.33 
2.03 3.26 
2.03 
2.04 3;7 
2.05 - 
2.06 3.33 
2.06 (2) - 
2.07 . 3.26 
2.08 3.26 
2.08 
2.09 3;9 
2.09 - 
2.10 
2.12 3% 
2.13 3.22 
2.13 3.41 
2.13 - 
2.15 3.26 
2.15 3.33 
2.15 - 
2.16 3.26 
2.16 3.36 
2.16 (2) 3.41 (2) 
2.16 - 
2.17 3.37 
2.17 - 
2.18 - 
2*19(2) - 
2.20 - 
2.21 - Mean 
No. of weight No. of 
mosquitoes (mg.) mosquitoes 
- - 24 
8 2.91 12 
57 2.31 53 
- - 108 
- - 31 
190 2.14 104 Mean Mean 
weight No. of weight 
(mg.) mosquitoes (mg.) 
3.04 28 1.67 
3.16 24 1.65 
2.98 28 1.41 
2.52 60 1.27 
2.29 79 1.18 
2.34 91 1.14 
Table 28. Weight and wing length frequency 
Wing 
Weight length 
(mg.) (mm.) 
2.23 3.48 
2.24 3.48 
2.26 3.29 
2.26 (2) - 
2.28 - 
2.29 3.44 
2.31 - 
2.32 3.29 
2.32 3.48 
2.33 - 
2.34 - 
Culture B* 
1.99 3.33 
2.12 3.33 
2.20 3.36 
2.24 3.41 
2.25 3.19 
2.25 3.36 
2.29 3.36 
2.30 3.33 
2.30 - 
2.31 3 *22 
2.31 - 
2.33 - 
2.34 - 
2.36 - 
2.46 - 
2.47 (2) - 
2.48 (4) - 
2.50 (2) - 
2.51 - 
2.52 - 
2.54 (2) - 
2.56 (2) - 
2.57 - 
2.59 - 
2.60 - 
Culture C* 
2.14 3.36 
2.20 3.33 
2.24 3.36 
2.32 3.33 
2.32 3.36 
2.32 3.41 
2.36 3.44 
2.39 3.29 
2.40 3.41 Weight 
(mg.) 
2.41 
2.42 
244 
2.45 
2.46 
2.49 
2.50 
2.50 
2.51 
2.52 
2.53 
2.54 (2) 
2.55 
2.60 
2.61 
2.61 
2.63 
2.65 
2.65 
2.65 
2.66 
2.67 
2.67 (2) 
2.68 
2.70 
2.71 
2.72 
2.73 
2.75 
2.75 
2.75 
2.78 
2.79 
2.85 
2.90 
2.91 
2.95 Wing 
length 
(mm.) 
3.33 
3.48 
3.41 
3.41 
3.48 
3.41 
3.41 
3.36 
3.48 
3.48 
3.41 
3.51 (2) 
3.41 
3.51 
3 -44 
3.48 
3.44 
3.33 
3.41 
3.48 
3.51 
3.41 
3.55 (2) 
3.58 
3.51 
344 
3.48 
3.48 
3.48 
3.51 
3.55 
3.48 
3.55 
3.48 
3.58 
3.77 
3.66 
Culture D* 
1.13 2.90 
1.22 2.75 
1.29 2.93 
1.59 3.19 
1.65 3.04 
1.68 3.15 
1.75 3.12 
1.76 3.12 
1.82 3.26 
1.97 3.33 Weight 
(mg.) 
1.98 
2.05 
2.07 
2.09 
2.14 
2.15 
2.15 
2.17 
2.19 
2.20 
2.20 
2.22 
2.23 
2.24 
2.25 
2.29 
2.29 
2.31 
2.32 
2.35 
2-37 
2.39 
2.41 
2.41 
2.43 
2.46 
2.48 
2.48 
2.50 
2.57 
2.60 
2.60 
2.60 
2.63 
2.77 
2.78 
2.81 
2.85 
2.89 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- Wing 
length 
(mm.) 
3.26 
3.33 
3.33 
3.33 
3.26 
3.22 
3.33 
3.26 
3.33 
3.33 
3.48 
3.29 
- 
344 
3.26 
3.29 
3.41 
3.41 
3.33 
3.29 
3.37 
3.37 
3.33 
3.37 
3.33 
3.48 
3.44 
3.55 
3.62 
3.51 
3.33 
344 
3.51 
3.48 
3.48 
3.26 
3.55 
3.55 
3.58 
3.19 
3.22 
3.26 (5) 
3.29 
3.33 (2) 
3.37 
3.41 (5) 
3 -44 
3.48 (2) 
3.51 (2) Wing 
Weight length 
(mg.) (mm.) 
Culture G* 
2.26 3.70 
2.41 3.77 
2.49 3.62 
2.49 3.70 
2.63 3.84 
2.75 3.84 
2.87 3.91 
2.88 3.84 
2.91 3.99 
2.93 3.84 
2.97 3.88 
3.14 4.13 
3.40 3.99 
3.44 3.91 
Culture F* 
(Males) 
0.91 2.46 
1.09 2.54 
1.13 (2) 2.54 (2) 
1.14 2.57 
1.17 2.68 
1.18 2.57 
1.25 2.50 
1.26 2.54 
1.26 2.64 
1.27 2.68 
1.28 2.54 
1.30 2.54 
1.40 2.75 
1.53 2.68 
Culture H. 
Starvation 
forms* 
(Females) 
0.97 - 
1.06 2.75 
1.43 2.68 
1.49 2.86 
1.59 2.86 
1.61 2.83 
(Males) 
0.74 2.12 
1.11 2.35 
* For particulars of cultures see Table 29. 
411 
THE IMAGO 
In Table 27 is given the weight of female and male A. aegypti mosquitoes kept at 70 per 
cent relative humidity without food but with access to water. It will be seen that the mean 
weight of the female in these series has become reduced by the third day from about 
3-O mg., shortly after emergence, to 2.5 mg., and by the fourth day to about 2.3 mg. The 
male weight has also decreased, there being a steady reduction from 1.6 mg. to under 
1.2 mg. Hereafter there appears to be little further loss of weight up to, in the female, the 
tenth day when as a rule considerable mortality has occurred. 
Table 29. Index to cultures 
Culture Date 
A 10. v. 48 
B 12. v. 48 
C 2. vi. 48 
D 10. vi. 48 
G 23. i. 48 
F 16. vi. 48 
H - Tempera- 
ture 
(” C.) 
28 
28 
28 
28 
17 
28 
25 Description 
A rather poor culture (females) 
A good normal culture (females) 
A good normal culture (females) 
Some overcrowding (females) 
Fine specimens (females) 
A good normal culture (males) 
Starvation forms Mean 
weight 
(mg.) 
2.08 
2.40 
2.57 
2.22 
2.83 
1.22 Mean 
wing 
length 
(mm.) 
3.30 
3.32 
3.46 
3.33 
3.85 
2.58 Index 
0.63 
0.72 
0.74 
O-67 
0.74 
0.47 
Females 1.36 2.80 0.49 
Males 0.92 2.23 0.41 
Apart from variation in weight due to difference in age there is considerable difference 
in weight depending upon the cultural conditions under which the adults have been reared 
(Fig. 52 (2)). In Table 28 are given the results of weighing adult A. aegypti reared under 
different conditions, including some routine standard cultures. The mean weight for the 
four routine cultures (195 females weighing 446.77 mg.) is 2.29 mg. The heaviest female in 
the series was 2.95 mg. and the smallest starvation form weighed 0.97 mg. In the culture 
of 10. vi. 48, a somewhat overcrowded and rather poor culture, the smallest female weighed 
l-13 mg. Otherwise the smallest form in normal culture weighed 1.67 mg. The usual run 
of females under normal cultural conditions (for which culture of 2. vi. 48 is a fair example) 
range between 2-O and 2.6 mm. All the figures relate to 5-day-old mosquitoes given access 
to water but without food. The weight of the male is only about half that of the female. In 
starvation forms, though the difference in size of the two sexes is much less, the female is 
still recognisedly slightly heavier than the male. 
(e) CORRELATION OF WING LENGTH AND WEIGHT 
For recording the size of mosquitoes experience would suggest some linear measurement 
or weight. Whilst weight might be regarded as the final arbiter of size, it has to be re- 
membered that it will differ greatly following upon feeding or in the gravid condition, and 
that it is liable to smaller changes as a result of age or other possible circumstances such as 
the taking in of water where this is provided in the cage. Nevertheless, weight, if taken under 
suitably specified conditions, is clearly a most desirable index, and if there is a close corre- 
lation with weight under given conditions and some easily taken linear measurement it 
would be useful to know this. Body length, as already noted, is unsatisfactory. If, therefore, 
a linear measurement is to be used that of the wing length would appear to be the most 
suitable for the purpose, since it is a relatively large part of the mosquito, is subject to little 
or no change and is easily measured. 
412 
WING LENGTH AND WEIGHT 
In Fig. 52 (1) is shown the result of plotting wing measurements against weight, as great 
a variety as possible in size of mosquito being made use of from the largest forms avail- 
able to the smallest starvation forms. To obtain the necessary material, cages of adults on 
the fifth day from emergence were selected and the mosquitoes removed and weighed 
individually until all, or nearly all, in the cage had been dealt with. After weighing, each 
mosquito was put away in a numbered small tube until it was convenient to take the wing 
measurement. The results are given in detail in Tables 28 and 29, the latter table giving a 
brief description of the cultures. 
It is evident from the plottings (Fig. 52 (1)) that a fairly high correlation exists and that 
a curve can be drawn about which the plottings are fairly evenly distributed. On general 
principles it was thought that the most likely relation of wing length to weight would be 
that between the linear measurement of the wing and the cube root of the weight, weight 
being largely equivalent to the third dimensional character of volume. Trial was therefore 
made on the basis of the formula : L=kvW+a, 
where L is the wing length in mm., W weight in mg. and k and a constants. The curve given 
in the graph is one using this formula with k = 2.54. It appeared unnecessary to consider 
the constant a which for all practical purposes could be written off as equal to 0. It is 
reasonable, therefore, to believe that the wing measurement and weight under the conditions 
noted are related in a simple manner and that as a gauge of size wing measurement is a 
very suitable and practical index. 
Marked by crosses, plottings for a small number of males are included in the graph. 
These lie a little off the female curve, as is to be expected, since the male wing does not in 
its characters entirely conform to that of the female. 
The graph gives some evidence, however, that relations of size and weight may be more 
complex than at first sight might appear. The plottings for Culture G (low temperature 
rearing) appear to suggest a curve more to the right than that relating to the species bred 
at 28” C. These very large specimens in fact require a curve with a higher value of k, for 
example k= 267. Similarly, males should be best represented by a lower value. 
Apart from weight, volume or other measurement is the somewhat indeterminate con- 
ception of size. But though lacking any precise form by which it can be expressed size often 
lies at the back of what it is desired to express by giving weight, length or other measure- 
ment. A. aegypti is being used in various experimental investigations and especially in the 
testing of aerosols and other products where precise results are required. For this purpose 
standardisation is essential, not only of the conditions of tests employed, but of the 
mosquitoes used in the tests. If the technique of rearing is faulty, that is does not provide 
conditions to produce the species in a satisfactory and standardised state, the most obvious 
evidence of this is reduced size of the mosquitoes reared. Of the criteria of size two have 
here been considered, namely weight and wing length. In Table 29 the ratios of weight to 
wing length for a number of cultures are set out in the column headed ‘Index’. This has 
varied from about 0.63 to 0.74 for females, low if the culture is poor, higher if the culture is 
good. Such a relation does not appear to be accidental. It is evident that if the relation of 
wing length to weight is as assumed in the equation, namely that of a linear to a three- 
dimensional value, then such relation will ensure, as a physical necessity, other things being 
equal, that the lower the index the smaller the mosquito. Hence the ‘index’ given above 
may also be an indicator of size that might be useful on occasion. 
413 
Wing length in millimetres 
Weight in milligrams 
Figure 52. Graphs of size and weight. 
Graph showing plottings of weight against wing length. The unbroken line is drawn at k = 254. 
The broken line curves are for k= l-89 and k= 2.67 respectively and relate to starvation forms 
(crosses) and specimens bred at low temperature (circles). For nature of k see text. 
Frequency distribution curves for weight, The unbroken line is for the weights of 195 females 
from the four cultures A-D. The broken lines are for the cultures A, c, and D separately. For 
details of the cultures see Tables 28 and 29 and text. 
Frequency distribution curve for wing lengths of 161 females of the four cultures A-D. For 
measurements see Table 28. 
Note. All observations relate to females, except where males are indicated. 
414 
WING LENGTH AND WEIGHT 
The frequency curve for weight of females from a single culture is usually fairly sym- 
metrical as shown in Fig. 52 (2). With massed cultures, where the means for the different 
cultures may vary, the resulting curve is liable to be more drawn out and irregular. With 
wing length the frequency curve is asymmetrical, there being a more abrupt fall in size with 
the larger forms than at the small end of the curve (Fig. 52 (3)). 
(f) OTHER PHYSICAL DATA RELATING TO THE IMAGO 
Whilst volume and specific gravity do not suggest themselves as of much 
relation to the adult mosquito, there are some points not without interest. importance in 
VOLUME 
Volume was ascertained by observing the rise of the meniscus in a small test-tube by means 
of the binocular microscope arranged horizontally as for determining the volume of the 
larva and pupa, but using butyl alcohol to ensure wetting and to minimise effect of evapora- 
tion. Five 5-day females with a mean weight of 2.30 mg. gave a mean value of 2.50 rnrn3, 
which would indicate a specific gravity of 2*30/2*50 or 0.920. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY 
The specific gravity was also ascertained directly by submerging carefully chloroformed 
adults in different strengths of alcohol of which the specific gravity was determined. It was 
found necessary to dip the insect momentarily into 80 per cent alcohol first to ensure 
wetting and freedom from bubbles. By moving the mosquito up and down several times 
while held in a forceps and leaving it in the middle of the tube to rise or sink as the case 
might be, reasonably reliable readings were possible. Newly emerged females rose in all 
dilutions, even slightly in absolute alcohol (sp. gr. 0.780). This was evidently due to the 
presence of the large air bubble in the mid-gut as described under emergence. Seven-day-old 
females showed considerable variation, being in equilibrium (that is neither rising nor 
sinking) in the case of different individuals in dilutions ranging from 10 to 60 per cent 
(sp. gr. 0.985-0*900). Seven-day-old males were much lighter and gave more uniform 
results. The following gives the number of mosquitoes just sinking at the specific gravity 
given, a mosquito rising in 10 per cent and sinking in 20, for example, being given under 
sp. gr. 20. 
Percentage Specific 
of alcohol gravity Females Males 
20 0.960 2 - 
30 0.955 2 - 
40 0.940 4 - 
50 0.920 5 - 
60 0.900 1 - 
70 0.870 - 5 
When rising in the fluid females tended to rise evenly right away up (as in flying position). 
Even if disturbed they regained this position. When in fluid of such specific gravity that 
they sank, they sank upside down. This rather suggests that in flight it is important, as in 
the larva, that the body should balance correctly. 
415 
THE IMAGO 
DRY WEIGHT 
A number of authors (notably Buxton, 1932, 1935; Theodor, 1936; Hochrainer, 1942) 
have dealt with the percentage of weight due to water in insects. Buxton found that this 
might range from under 50 to over 90. Hochrainer gives the range as from 55 to 85. The 
amount is to a considerable extent related to the fat present, water content being greater 
as that of fat is less. Buxton (1935), in hibernating Culex pipiens females, found that from 
October to March as during hibernation fat decreased from 27.9 to 6-3 per cent, water 
increased from 54 to 64.9 per cent. The following results show the percentage of water as 
shown by dry weight of A. aegypti adults on the fifth and sixth days from emergence kept 
at 25” C. and 70 per cent relative humidity with access to water but no food. 
Original Dry Percent- 
weight weight age of 
(g-1 (g.) water 
Fifth day 
40 females 0.0922 0.0278 69.8 
21 males 0.0235 0*0066 71.9 
Sixth day 
136 females 0.2930 O-098 1 66.5 
150 males O-1546 O-0458 70.4 
Hibernation has not been described in A. aegypti. The susceptibility of the species to 
mortality where kept at higher temperatures without access to water has already been noted. 
REFERENCES 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BLANCHARD, R. (1905). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BONNE, C. and BONNE-WEPSTER, J. (1925). Mosquitoes of Surinam: a study of Neotropical 
mosquitoes. Kolon. Instit. Amsterdam, Meded 21. Afd. Trop. Hyg. no. 13. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1932). Terrestrial insects and the humidity of the environment. Biol. Rev. 7, 
275-320. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1935). Changes in the composition of adult Culex pipiens during hibernation. 
Parasitology, 27, 263-5. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
DYAR, H. G. (1928). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). OS mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Paris. 
HOCHRAINER, H. (1942). Der Wassergehalt bei Insekten und die Factoren die denselben bestim- 
men. 2001. Jahrb., Zool. 60, 387-436. 
HOGG, J. (1854). The Microscope: its History, Construction and Applications. W. S. Orr and Co., 
London. 
HOGG, J. (1871). On gnat’s scales. Mon. Micr. J. 6, 1924. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1913). The yellow fever mosquito. U.S. Dep. Agric., Farmers’ Bull. no. 547. 
Superseded by Fmrs’ Bull. no. 1354, published 1923. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912, 1917). See references in ch. 1(f), p. 19. 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). A General Textbook of Entomology. Methuen and Co., London. 
MARTINI, E. (1920). fiber Stechmiicken besonders deren EuropZsche Arten und ihre Bekamp- 
fung. Arch. Schlfi.- u. Tropenhyg. 24, Beih. 1, l-267. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1952). The sub-genus Stegomyia (Diptera : Culicidae) in the Ethiopian Region. 
Part I. Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), 2, no. 5. 
416 
REFERENCES 
MAYER, A. G. (1897). On the colour and colour patterns of moths and butterflies. Bull. Mus. 
Comp. Zool. Harv. 30, 169, 256. 
NEUMANN, R. 0. and MAYER, M. (1914). Atlas und Lehrbuch wichtiger tierischer Parasiten und 
ihrer Ubertrager. In Lehmann’s Mediz. Atlanten, 11, Miinchen. 
ONSLOW, H. (1921). On a periodic structure in many insect scales and the cause of their iridescent 
colours. Phil. Trans. R. Sot. 211, l-74. 
PERYASSU, A. G. (1908). OS Culicideao do Brazil. Typog. Leuzinger, Rio de Janeiro. 
ROY, D. N. (1936). On the role of blood in ovulation in Agdes aegypti Linn. Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 
423-9. 
SOPER, F. L., WILSON, D. B., LIMA, S. and ANTUNES, W. SA. (1943). The Organisation of Perma- 
nent Nation-wide Anti-Aedes aegypti Measures in Brazil. The Rockefeller Foundation. 
New York. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1947). The flight-tone (wing stroke frequency) of insects. Acta Entom. Fennica, 4, 
117 pp. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1952). The essential factor regulating the wing stroke frequency of insects in wing 
mutilation and loading experiments, etc. Ann. Zool. Sot. Vanamo, 15, no. 2, l-67. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1901). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 46. 
THEODOR, 0. (1936). On the relation of Phlebotomuspapatasii to the temperature and humidity of 
the environment. Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 653-7 1. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2. (see also many later 
editions). Methuen and Co., London, pp. 354-5. 
27 417 CH 
XVIII 
THE IMAGO: 
EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
(a) THE HEAD CAPSULE 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION (Figs.53,54) 
For accounts of the head capsule in insects in general see Comstock (1920) ; Crampton 
(1921);Snodgrass(l935,1943,1953). Foraverycompletestudyoftheheadcapsuleinalarge 
number of Dipteran types, including the mosquito Psorophora and a standardised nomen- 
clature of parts see Petersen (19 16). A very complete account of the head capsule and its 
appendages in the mosquito is that by Robinson (1939) on these parts in Anopheles. 
Another recent helpful paper is that by Jobling (1928) on the head capsule of Cukoides, 
which has many resemblances to that of the mosquito; see also Christophers, Shortt and 
Barraud (1926) on the head and mouth-parts of Phlebotomus. 
The homologies of the mosquito head capsule have been studied mainly from the 
comparative point of view; but consideration may also be given to ontological evidence, 
namely to the changes in passage from the larva, where in many respects the nature of the 
parts is more evident, to the imago. These changes largely take place in the prepupa and 
are made further evident in the pupa. Besides extrusion of the antenna1 and mouth-part 
rudiments there are changes in the head capsule itself. These are largely accounted for by 
Dorsal view of head. 
Ventral view of head. Figure 53. The head capsule. 
Lateral view of head. a, extension from region of the anterior opening of the tentorium to 
mandible. 
Lateral view of clypeal apodeme and furcal plate. a, clypeal fossa; b, point of attachment 
of clypeo-labral muscles; c, joint-like break in wall of clypeus; d, dorsal labral sclerite; 
e, ventral wall of labrum and roof of blood channel; f, blood channel. 
Enlarged view of left half of frontal area showing the pedicel displaced to display the scape 
and its attachments. a, articulating points of scape with pedicel; b, articulating points of scape 
with the head capsule. 
Showing apical portion of clypeus everted and relation to the clypeal apodemes. 
Tentorial bar of male imago. a, posterior more tubular portion; b, anterior ballooned portion. 
Lettering : apn, anterior pronotal lobe ; BP, bucco-pharynx ; CL, clypeus ; CLa, clypeal apodeme ; 
CLa’, everted CLa; csc, cervical sclerite; E, compound eye; E’, ocular sclerite; eps, epicranial 
suture; fp, furcal plate; fsc, sockets of forked scales; hp, hypopharynx; is, inter-antenna1 suture ; 
L, labium ; L’, labial area; Lr, labrum; md, mandible ; mxa, maxillary apodeme ; mxp’, base of 
maxillary palp; Oc, occiput; Oc’, paraocciput ; oc’, paired ocellus; of, occipital foramen; oh, 
orbital hairs; P’, post-pharynx; pas, pre-antenna1 suture; pd, pedicel; pfs, post-frontal suture; 
pge, postgena ; sea, scape ; sd, salivary duct ; sd, salivary pump ; slh, sublabial hairs ; soh, suborbital 
hairs; T, tentorium; T’, anterior opening of tentorium (position of); V, vertex. 
418 
, 02mm. , a 
3 ______ _ L 
I 02mm., 2 
6 
Figure 53 
419 27-2 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
the great reduction, almost amounting to collapse and disappearance, of those portions of 
the larval head that have been adapted to meet the method of feeding in the larval stage, 
namely the great expanse of the labral and clypeal regions necessary to accommodate the 
relatively enormous pharynx and the elaborate feeding brush mechanism. By this collapse 
the whole of the front portion of the larval head, amounting to perhaps two-thirds of the 
head, is reduced in the imago to the relatively insignificant clypeus. Further the reduc- 
tion of the median parts of the head capsule has brought inwards, nearly to the median 
line, the antenna1 prominences with their contained antenna1 base rudiments and with these 
the genal areas of the head bearing the large compound eyes. Also through the shift of the 
parts due to these changes the anterior openings of the tentorium are brought from the 
ventral position as in the larva to the dorsal aspect, that is in the natural position of the head, 
to the anterior aspect of the head. Also the shrinkage of the median parts and the increase 
in the area of the compound eyes at the expense of the genal areas results in the genal areas 
in the imago being restricted to the relatively small tracts named by Petersen the postgenae. 
With these general considerations a brief description of the head capsule in Agdes 
aegypti may be given. In both sexes the head is noticeably globular, the anterior half 
being largely occupied by the large convex kidney-shaped compound eyes (E), whilst the 
posterior half is formed mainly of the rounded occiput (0~) and, ventrally, of the postgenae 
(pge). Between the compound eyes, one on each side of the middle line, are the antennae 
(Fig. 54 A, B), plumose in the male, less conspicuously hairy in the female, with their large 
conspicuous globular basal second segments (pd). Below these in the middle line there 
projects a snout-like prolongation of the head sometimes termed the rostrum (Fig. 49 
(2) ro), its dorsal portion formed by the characteristic convexfronto-clypeus, or as it will 
here be designated clypeus (CL). Extending forwards from below the clypeus is the 
cylindrical proboscis (Fig. 54 (2)), with on each side the maxillary palps, usually referred 
to in systematic works on the mosquito as the palps, short in the female, as long as the 
proboscis in the male (Fig. 54 (3), (4)). 
Posterior to the occiput is the large occipital foramen (of) and passing forwards from the 
upper margin of this in the median line is a deep median suture, partly apodematous but 
becoming shallower anteriorly, which is considered by Petersen to be the epicranial suture 
(eps), also termed the coronal suture (Robinson). Anteriorly the occiput extends forwards 
between the eyes as a narrow strip-like area, the vertex (V), which ends anteriorly at a 
short V-shaped line of thickening called by Robinson the prefrontal suture (pfi), and which 
at this point links together the marginal framework of the two compound eyes. Still 
further forwards is an area lying between the hollowed-out anterior margins of the two 
compound eyes and from which the antennae take origin. This is traversed in the median 
line by a strong suture, the nature of which is discussed later, but which Robinson very 
suitably terms the interantennal suture (is). Just distal to the postfrontal suture are two 
small circular areas, one on each side of the median suture, that are strongly suggestive of, 
and have all the appearance of, degenerate ocelli, including a lens-like thickening of the 
cuticle (Fig. 53 (1) oc’; 56 (10)). Whether these are, as they appear to be, the dorsal ocelli 
commonly present in this situation or not is still a matter of discussion : see under ‘ Special 
sense organs’, p. 648 and under ‘ Propulsatory organs’, p. 619. 
After extending to a level a little anterior to the bases of the antennae the interantennal 
suture bifurcates, the branches (pas) passing to the anterior openings of the tentorial bars 
(Fig. 53 T’), that is to the lateral angles of the area now being considered, which, for reasons 
420 
THE HEAD CAPSULE 
given later, will be termed the frontal area. According to Petersen these branches as seen 
in Psorophora are the arms of the epicranial suture (frontal suture of Snodgrass). This view 
is that accepted by most recent authors, but, for reasons given later, it is open to some 
doubt and the name pre-antennal sutures (pas) will provisionally be used for them, being 
less committal as to their nature* 
There still remain to be considered the posterior and ventral aspects of the head and the 
intra-capsular structures. Posteriorly and ventrally a considerable extent of the head 
capsule is occupied by the large occipital foramen. On its upper margin on each side of 
the middle line is a thickening carrying a projection (0~‘) which articulates with the 
anterior arm of the neck sclerite and which Petersen terms paraocciput. Ventrally on the 
margins of the occipital foramen are thickenings where the posterior arms of the tentorium 
are attached and internal to these the attachment of the maxillary apodemes, as described 
later. Lateral to the foramen the occiput merges without break on each side into the smooth 
cheek-like areas termed by Petersen the postgenae (pge), again a term that will be open to 
some discussion later. The postgenae are continued without break on to the ventral aspect 
of the head and may be regarded as extending forwards between the lower margins of the 
compound eyes to the under surface of the rostrum. In Psorophora Petersen notes the presence 
of a median depression passing from the ventral margin of the occipital foramen in the median 
line to the base of the proboscis where this takes origin from the rostrum. An indication 
of such a line as shown by a clear interval in the stained cuticle is present in ALides aegypti. 
Passing through the head on each side are the imaginal tentorial bars (Fig. 53 (3) T). 
In the imago these are large open tubes, patent throughout and much greater in diameter 
than in the larva. Anteriorly they open by a wide funnel-shaped opening in the position 
already indicated. Posteriorly they are attached to thickenings on the ventral margin of 
the occipital foramen. A little behind the middle point of each tube is a line of junction, or 
slight membranous gap, between the posterior portion, which is narrower and of more 
even diameter, and the anterior portion, which is wider and more uneven in shape. In the 
male the anterior portion is ballooned (Fig. 53 (7) b) possibly as a balancing device during 
flight. Towards the anterior end of the tube in Anopheles Robinson describes a spur 
representing the dorsal arm of the tentorium. This is not usually present in the female 
ACdes aegypti, but in the male a somewhat plate-like expansion takes off towards the 
posterior end of the ballooned portion. Near the posterior end of the bar in the female is 
a short spur very similar to that present in the larva, inconspicuous or absent in the male. 
Internal and ventral to the tentorial bars are two conspicuous rods, thicker and denser in 
the female, narrower and less dense in the male, which represent the basal portions of the 
maxillae. Posteriorly these are attached to membrane at the ventral edge of the occipital 
foramen a little internal to the posterior arms of the tentorium (Fig. 53 (2) mxa). Anteriorly 
they articulate with the free portion of the maxilla (galea) and give support to the maxillary 
palps. They are considered by Petersen in Psorophora to be the stipes. The basal segment or 
cardo is not distinguishable. 
THE COMPOUND EYES (Fig. 53(1),(2)E) 
These are approximately of equal size in the two sexes, nearly meeting on the dorsum of the 
head and ventrally. In some cases, both in the male and in the female, they may actually 
meet below. Each eye is surrounded by a rim of thickened cuticle, ocular sclerite (E’), 
united on the vertex as already described by the postfrontal suture (pfs). 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
The eyes are roughly oval in shape with a hollowed-out anterior border, deeper in the 
male than in the female, caused by the presence of the large basal antenna1 segments. They 
are composed of ommatidia (see ‘ Special sense organs ‘, p. 652) there being from 400 to 500 in 
each eye. The facets of the ommatidia as seen in preparations of the eye cuticle are circular, 
not hexagonal as described in some insects, often with a small triangular space left where 
the circles are not in contact. They measure from 21-24,~ in diameter and in AL;des aegypti 
are about equal in size in all parts of the eye and in both sexes, though on careful determi- 
nation of the size there is some variation in different parts of the eye and those of the male 
are somewhat smaller, though not fully in proportion to the smaller size of this sex. For 
further information see under special sense organs. 
About the middle of the posterior border of the compound eye there are still present 
traces of the larval ocellus as described by Constantineanu (1930) in Culex pipiens. The 
extent to which such traces are present varies. In some individuals they are large and well 
separated from the margin of the compound eye. In others they are chiefly evident as a 
thickening or deformation of the border of the eye. They leave no distinct facets on the 
cuticle after treatment with potash as do the ommatidia of the compound eye. 
THE ANTENNAE (Fig. 54(l) A,B an) 
The antenna in both sexes consists of a ring-like basal segment, scape (sea), a globular 
second segment, pedicel (pd), and a long, thirteen-segmented$ageZZum (fi2). The two basal 
segments differ but little in general structure in the two sexes, though the scape is possibly 
more distinctly separated from the head capsule and the pedicel is larger and more strictly 
globular in the male. On the inner aspect of the scape is a short projection which articu- 
lates with the base of the pedicel. A less marked thickening is present on the outer portion 
of the ring. These two attachments tend to restrict movement to a hinge-like up and down 
and somewhat oblique direction of movement of the antennae. The scape is further sur- 
rounded by a ring-like thickening of the head capsule separated from it by a narrow area 
of membrane. This thickening has two small projections between those by which the scape 
articulates with the pedicel so that there is altogether a more or less developed double 
hinge joint with the axes approximately at right angles. The pedicel in both sexes contains 
the special sense organ known as Johnston’s organ, but rather more developed in the male. 
In the typical insect antenna the scape is usually long, and, in addition, there is a ring- 
like thickening on the head capsule which carries a process, antennifer, on its lower part. 
In the present case the basal ring is the scape. The fact that the globular segment contains 
Johnston’s organ leaves no doubt as to its being the pedicel. 
The flagellum in the female consists of thirteen distinct segments, the second of which is 
the shortest, after which the segments increase in length gradually to the thirteenth, which 
is about one-tenth of the length of the whole flagellum (Fig. 54 (1) A b). Each segment of 
the flagellum, except the first, is formed of a narrow basal ring followed by a clear mem- 
branous area on which is borne a whorl of five or six hairs arranged round the segment. 
This is followed by a long apical cylindrical sclerotised portion forming the main length of 
the segment. This apical portion is somewhat tuberculated and carries small hairs with 
some rather larger ones apically, making a subsidiary series to the main hairs borne on the 
membranous area. This subsidiary series is most developed towards the base of the antenna 
and becomes less conspicuous towards the apex. The first segment of the flagellum, like 
422 
THE HEAD CAPSULE 
the other segments, has a basal ring where it joins the pedicel and a clear membranous 
area following this, but with no hairs. The long hairs in this case spring from the body of 
the segment. 
The flagellum in the male (Fig. 54 (1) B; 7) also consists of thirteen segments. Of these 
the two terminal ones are of about equal length, but disproportionately long as compared 
with the remaining segments, the two together forming about half the length of the whole 
flagellum. The terminal segment, like that in the female, has a basal clear area from which 
springs a circlet of about 8 hairs. Each of the remaining segments is peculiarly modified 
and of quite complex structure. Each carries towards its apex conspicuous crescentic 
outgrowths situated opposite one another on the segment and carrying whorls of about 
up to 20 long hairs which spring in a curious manner from the lower outside edge of the 
projecting outgrowths (Fig. 54 (7)). Apical to the crescents is a short length of the segment 
carrying small hairs. What appears at first sight to be a narrow length of segment basal to 
the hair-bearing crescents is seen on closer examination to be a dark cylindrical core sur- 
rounded by a thin transparent membrane bearing small hairs and widely separated from 
the core by a clear space (Fig. 54 (7)). The segments are separated by narrow, clear bands. 
The long penultimate segment, unlike the long apical segment, carries crescentic outgrowths 
and whorls of hairs like the more basal segments. 
THE CLYPEUS (Fig. 53 (1) CL) 
The reasons for terming this structure clypeus, rather than fronto-clypeus, is partly that it 
has long been so designated in a very large systematic literature dealing with the mosquito 
and partly for reasons of homology based on the present studies. The clypeus forms a 
rounded snout-like projection constituting the dorsal portion of the rostrum and largely 
forming the part of the head from which the mouth-parts appear to spring. Anteriorly in 
the middle line its wall is sharply bent in over the base of the labrum, forming a small 
invagination termed by Robinson the clypeal fossa. At its apex in the middle line is a 
thickening to which the base of the labrum is attached and into which is inserted the fan- 
shaped clypeo-labral muscle (Fig. 53 (4) b). Dorsal to this thickening laterally there 
project backwards into the cavity of the clypeus a pair of hook-shaped apodemes which 
receive the insertion of the muscles termed by Robinson the elevators of the labrum and by 
Thompson the epipharyngeal muscles, and which arise from the lateral portions of the roof 
of the so-called buccal cavity (bucco-pharyngeal cavity). These are the clypeal apodemes of 
Robinson, the alae clypeales and Zaminae frontales of other authors (Fig. 53 (3), (4) CLa). 
The real nature of these parts does not seem to have been fully appreciated. The clypeus 
is not so wholly a rigid structure as its appearance might suggest and considerable areas on 
its surface are membranous. Further, just above the clypeal apodemes is a break in the 
thick anterior wall very suggestive of a partial joint. Very often in a preparation of the parts 
the front portion of clypeus with the apodemes is seen everted, forming a plate of which the 
lateral angles are the clypeal apodemes (Fig. 53 (6) CLa’). Muscles pulling the apodemes 
downwards would tend to project the apical portion of the clypeus with the labrum for- 
wards, that is the apodemes appear to be levers which would tend to project the labrum. 
Elevators of the labrum would be retractors of this structure to return it to position, should 
it have been projected forwards. 
External to the clypeal apodemes and occupying the middle portion of the sides of the 
423 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
clypeus are two apodematous sheets termed by Robinson the fulcral plates (fp). These 
pass upwards from the sides of the bucco-pharynx to blend with the walls of the clypeus. 
Their posterior borders form a conspicuous feature when the parts are viewed laterally as 
transparent mounted preparations (Fig. 53 (3), (4) fp; 61 (2) ap). 
Where the sides of the clypeus merge ventrally into the postgenae there are on each side 
rod-like extensions continued forwards from the floor of the tentorial openings which are 
referred to later when discussing the basal connections of the mandibles (Fig. 53 (3) a). 
THE FRONTAL AREA (Fig. 53(l),(5)) 
This is the portion of head capsule situated caudad to the clypeus and which lies between 
the compound eyes and anterior to the post-frontal suture. It has very generally been 
accepted as a portion of the vertex, largely because of the interpretation placed on the 
median suture as the epicranial suture, and its branches as the branches of this suture. 
Such a view requires either that the frons is missing or incorporated without any revealing 
suture in a fronto-clypeus. It also hypothecates that the epistomal suture which normally 
passes between the two tentorial openings is absent, the suture taking this position being 
already ear-marked as the branches of the epicranial suture. A view based on what has 
been said regarding the crowding out of the median areas of the head would, on the other 
hand, allow of a much more natural explanation of the homologies. Thus the antennae of 
insects normally arise from the parietal plates of the head capsule, never, according to 
Snodgrass, from the frons. The paired ocelli are also borne on these plates. In the standard 
insect head the single ocellus is commonly borne on the frons. If now it be supposed that 
the two genae bearing the large compound eyes have overridden the central parts, carrying 
in the antennae and forming by their contact the deep central suture (in which the frons is 
engulfed) and by their anterior edges, where they press up against the clypeus, forming the 
branches of this suture, that is no longer regarding these as branches of the epicranial 
suture, but secondary structures, there are few difficulties in giving a natural explanation to 
all the parts. Thus the antennae and paired ocelli are as they should be. The frons and the 
single median ocellus are eliminated. The single ocellus, instead of having to be given a 
position well down on the fronto-clypeus away from the paired ocelli, can be regarded as 
merely buried in its natural place near the paired ocelli. The epistomal suture is not elimi- 
nated but merely backed up against by the overriding parts and still passes, as it should do, 
behind the clypeus and in front of the frons from one tentorial opening to the other. 
It might be held that even in the larva the dorsum of the head shows only a combined 
fronto-clypeus and no separate frons. But this is by no means certain, for something could 
be said for regarding the greatly swollen dorsum of the head between the sutures passing 
from the neck to the neighbourhood of the antenna not as fronto-clypeus, but as frons, and 
it is not impossible that the so-called pre-clypeus is the rightful clypeus (see under ‘Embryo- 
logy’, p. 191). There clearly remains here an interesting point for determination by careful 
ontological investigation. Meanwhile, in the undue development of the median parts of the 
dorsum of the head in the larva to allow for the special mode of feeding, there is clearly a 
tendency for these parts, following upon such development, to become much reduced or 
even to be eliminated, much as the eighth spiracle of the larva has disappeared, in the 
imago. 
It has been suggested earlier in this chapter that the term postgena requires some 
424 
THE HEAD CAPSULE 
consideration. The gena in the larva has been accepted as the side of the head bearing the 
developing compound eyes and lying between the frontal suture dorsally and the hypo- 
stoma1 suture ventrally. Within these limits there are no appearances to suggest any 
separate postgenal area, since posteriorly the gena merges gradually into the occipital area. 
Occupying the very middle of this area in the fourth instar larva are the rapidly developing 
compound eyes. In the imago these have still further progressed, leaving merely remnants 
of the original gena about their periphery. If the shrinkage of the median parts and the 
overriding dorsally (and probably ventrally) of the lateral portions of the head be accepted, 
there would seem no reason to introduce a new term, postgena, for these parts. On such a 
view, therefore, the genae in the imago extend dorsally to the so-called epicranial suture. 
Seeing that the maxillary region, which in the larva lies between the hypostomal sutures, 
has in the imago become deeply buried and apodematous the genae also have met ventrally 
and the small area on the ventral aspect of the head not occupied by the compound eyes is 
again merely a vestige of the gena. 
CHAETAE OF THE HEAD CAPSULE (Fig. 53(l),(2)) 
The most conspicuous, indeed almost the only, chaetae of any size on the head consist of 
a row of stout bristles arising behind the margins of the compound eyes, orbital chaetae of 
Edwards (ocular of Christophers, 1933). In Ak;des aegypti these form a continuous or 
almost continuous line, there being about eight to twelve large bristles on each side dorsally 
and about six or more smaller hairs ventrally (oh, soh). The dorsal series do not extend 
forwards onto the small vertex. There may be somewhat of a gap between the series 
laterally. The series is present in both sexes. Ventrally in the female there may be a further 
line or staggered row of small hairs behind the ventral orbital row, postgenal hairs. This 
series is doubtfully present in the male where the ventral postgenal area is much less 
extensive than in the female. 
The only other hairs that might be considered as relating to the head, other than to the 
mouth-parts, are those on the antenna1 segments described under that organ and the six 
hairs at the base of the labium. 
(b) THE MOUTH-PARTS 
The mouth-parts of the mosquito have been described by many authors. See Thompson 
(1905) and later accounts by Robinson (1939) of the parts in Anopheles and the description 
by Gordon and Lumsden (1939) of the parts and their function in AFdes aegypti. These 
last two papers leave little more to be done in description of the parts and the mechanism 
by which they function. The mouth-parts in the male in a number of species have been 
described by Marshall and Staley (1935). 
All the structures, except the maxillary palps, lie in what is commonly referred to as the 
proboscis (Fig. 54 (2)). As seen externally this is constituted by the Zabium (L), which forms 
a sheath-like trough in which the other parts are contained except during the act of punc- 
turing the skin and sucking blood, when they are in part exposed as described later. These 
inner parts consist of six stylets, namely a median dorsally situated Zabrum (Lr), a part 
lying ventral to this, the hypopharynx (hp), a pair of mandibles (md) and a pair of maxillae 
(mx). All these parts, as shown by Robinson, are held together by surface tension of the 
425 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
oily secretion with which they are bathed. As such they form a single perforating organ, 
the fascicle. The extreme tenuity of these stylets is one of the outstanding marvels of natural 
history, so much so that, until their method of use in the form of the fascicle had been shown 
by Gordon and Lumsden, it was difficult to understand how such delicate and filamentous 
organs could perform the function of piercing the human skin. The general appearance of 
the parts as they are seen in a low-power preparation under the microscope is shown in 
Fig. 54 (2) and in section in Fig. 62. 
THE LABIUM (Fig. 54 (2) L) 
The labium externally is covered with vestitural scales like other external parts. The main 
portion of the organ is a long even cylindrical structure corresponding to what in some 
other diptera is termed the theta. Its walls, especially when stained, show fine irregular 
transverse striations formed by darker and lighter alternating bands. This appearance has 
been remarked upon by Dimmock as early as 188 1,1883 in Culex. It has been attributed by 
Vogel to the ability of the labium to adjust itself after feeding and by Patton and Cragg to 
its property of acutely bending during feeding, both actions probably indicating consider- 
able elasticity in its walls. In Anopheles, as noted by Robinson, this appearance is present 
only on the proximal and distal portions. In AFdes aegypti the striae are present through- 
out the length of the organ. 
Though often spoken of as forming a gutter for the other mouth-parts, the margins of 
the slit along the upper surface of the labium very nearly approach one another except in 
about the basal third where the dorsally situated labrum is somewhat exposed. Towards 
the apex the borders of the slit close in and entirely enclose the stylets. During the act of 
feeding, as described later, the fascicle may be thrust out by bending of the labium except at 
the extreme end. Even if forcibly removed from this terminal portion of the groove the 
insect with some little trouble is able to return the parts to their sheath. 
At its base ventrally the labium forms a slight bulge from which in the female arise six 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 Figure 54. Appendages of the head. 
Antenna. A, male; B, female. 
General view of mouth-parts of female as they appear in a mounted preparation. 
Maxilla of female showing galea, maxillary palp and stipes. 
Maxillary palp of male. Ventral side is to the right. 
Tip of galea of female. A, as seen fully on the flat; B, as commonly seen partly on edge. Half 
scale of A. 
Two segments of female antenna. a, main hair series arising from clear area at base of 
segment; b, subsidiary series at apex of segment; c, intersegmental membrane. 
Third antenna1 segment of male. a, intersegmental membrane; b, one of pair of hair-bearing 
crescents; c, dark core of segment; d, outer thin membrane bearing microtrichae; e, basal 
sclerotisation of d, giving appearance of an additional dark band. 
A, tip of labrum of female; B, tip of male labrum; c, tip of hypopharynx. 
Dorsal view of tip of labium, showing labella and median organ. a, plates on inner aspect of 
labella. 
Ventral view of same. 
Lettering : $I, flagellum; ga, galea ; hp, hypopharynx ; L, labium ; Lr, labrum; Zb, labellum; 
Zg, ligula; md, mandible; mx, maxilla; mxp, maxillary palp; pd, pedicel; sea, scape ; sti, stipes. 
426 
I O-Imm. , 9 10 
427 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
very regularly placed hairs (Fig. 53 (2) slh). Hairs are also present in the male in this 
situation, but are not so constantly regular in number and arrangement. The junction of the 
base with the rostrum ventrally is not specially thickened or articulated and is separated 
from the ventral head capsule only by a thin membranous line. Laterally, however, the 
edges of the groove are thickened and closely bound to the maxillary bases where the galea 
and the apodematous rods meet and where the maxillary palps take origin. 
Terminally the labium carries two small lobes, the labella (Fig. 54 (9), (10) Zb), between 
which in the middle line is a sharp-pointed median structure, the Zigula (Zg). In A. aegypti 
each labellum consists of two segments, a proximal and a distal, as indicated by cuticular 
plates. The ligula terminates in a hairy point (particularly hairy in the male) and has a 
median raphe which articulates at its base with the body of the labium. Between the 
labella and the labium is a membranous area in which are some small very dense sclerites 
apparently forming basal articulations to the labella and on the inner aspect of each 
labellum is a thickening which articulates basally with the inner of the small sclerites 
(Fig. 54 (9)). On their inner aspects the labella are largely membranous and hollowed, 
forming a space in which the tips of the stylets normally lie. 
The labella are generally considered to represent the labial palps. The body of the labium 
has been very variously interpreted. It is considered by Crampton to consist of the fused 
palpifers of the labial appendages. According to Snodgrass the labium of the mosquito 
is probably the prementum, other more basal parts being unrepresented. 
THE LABRUM (Fig. 54(8) A,B) 
The labrum is the stoutest of the stylets. It resembles a long straight sword with a bevelled 
pointed end. It consists of a median dorsal plate and two lateral thickenings all linked by 
membrane except apically where they become for a short distance continuous. The dorsal 
plate (Fig. 53 Lr’) is attached basally by a narrow point to the median process of the turned- 
in tip of the clypeus. The lateral thickenings with the membrane linking them are continued 
from the roof of the bucco-pharyngeal cavity. The organ as a whole forms an inverted 
gutter, the thickened edges of which with their flanges by meeting ventrally form a tube, 
the food canal, through which blood or other fluids are conveyed to the mouth and 
pharynx. For sections see Fig. 62. 
Apically the labrum ends in a sharp bevelled point resembling very much that of a 
hypodermic needle, except that it is slightly curved at the tip when seen in lateral view. 
A little way back from the point on each side at the termination of the lateral thickenings 
is a small papilla believed to be a gustatory sense organ. There seem to be no other organs 
which could be concerned in taste, at least in A. aegypti. But in Anopheles there are other 
structures in this situation which may have that function. According to Robinson the 
labrum is the only one of the stylets provided with sensory organs. In the female the 
labrum has a long tapering point. In the male the open part is shorter and the end is cut 
off at a more abrupt angle. The sensory pegs in this sex are quite conspicuous. 
It was formerly believed that the food canal was completed below by apposition of the 
hypopharynx. It has been shown, however, by Vogel and others that the sides of the 
labrum themselves complete the canal except for a short distance towards the base. 
Formerly also the labrum was generally referred to as the labrum-epipharynx. As noted, 
however, by Snodgrass, there seems no reason for regarding the ventral surface of the 
428 
THE MOUTH-PARTS 
labrum in insects where this is elongated as being epipharynx. The complicated larval 
epipharynx in the mosquito is absorbed in the pupal stage and even if a relic of it still 
remains in the imago it plays no part in the building up of the labrum in this stage. At the 
base of the lateral rods of the labrum in the midge Culicoides Jobling (1928) describes 
small sclerites noted by Petersen as present in certain Diptera and referred to as tormae. 
Such are not mentioned by Robinson in Anopheles and I have not been able to identify 
such in Aedes aegypti. 
THE HYPOPHARYNX (Fig. 53(4); 54(2); 62) 
Ventral to the labrum is the next stoutest of the stylets, the hypopharynx (hp). The hypo- 
pharynx is a thin flat stylet with a midrib along its full length within which lies the terminal 
portion of the salivary duct (sd). At its base is the salivary pump (sd’). Its termination is 
shaped rather like a long pen-nib (Fig. 54 (8) c). At or near the point is the opening of the 
salivary duct. In Anopheles (Macloskie, 1887, 1888; Robinson, 1939) the opening is a trace 
proximal to the actual point. In AL;des aegypti the opening so far as could be ascertained 
is terminal. Basally the hypopharynx is continuous with the floor of the buccopharynx. 
In the male it is represented only by a ridge on the labium, the salivary duct or groove 
passing along the floor of the labial gutter to the tip of the ligula. 
THE MANDIBLES (Fig. 54(2) md) 
The mandibles are much the least conspicuous of the stylets and in AL;des aegypti may 
require a little trouble to display. They lie close along the labrum and are apt to remain so 
in a dissection. The basal half or so is fairly stout and readily seen, but the terminal half is 
extremely thin and transparent. The mandibles of the mosquito are commonly depicted as 
they are seen in Anopheles, that is as having a triangular expansion at the tip furnished with 
fine teeth. In Acdes aegypti they appear to terminate in a smooth lancet-like tip with no teeth. 
Gordon and Lumsden, who worked with A. aegypti, do not describe the mandibles which 
they say were never observed when watching penetration by the fascicle. Dimmock (1881) 
figures the mandibles in his ‘ Culex rufus’ much as described above, that is lancet-shaped 
with no teeth. There are two species given by Dyar (1928) under the synonym of C. rufus, 
namely Ai;des cinereus and Culex pipiens. Since Dimmock gives C. pipiens as another of the 
species he was working with it seems probable that the Culex rufus referred to was an AL;des. 
It is possible, therefore, that in this genus the mandibles of the female are of this character. 
According to Robinson the mandibles cover the opening of the labrum when this organ 
is not in use, which would appear to be their main, if not only, function. 
Marshall and Staley (1935), also Marshall (1938), note that in British mosquitoes 
mandibles are present in the male, though usually reduced, in a number of genera, but are 
absent in Ai;des. They are absent in A. aegypti. 
The mandibles are articulated at the sides of the rostrum with a small sclerite linking 
them to an extension passing forwards from the floor of the anterior opening of the ten- 
torium. This small sclerite is evidently the ‘mandibular condyle’ first described by Jobling 
in Culicoides. Robinson describes a similar condition in Anopheles when he describes the 
mandibles as articulating at their base with a thickening on the genal wall termed by the 
author the ‘genal shelf’. In A. aegypti the parts referred to can be correlated with structures 
in the larva the nature of which is more evident. The mandible in the larva, as already 
described, takes origin from the edges of a large fenestra on the ventral aspect of the head, 
429 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
but has a definite articulation at one point only on the ventral edge of the fenestra, the rest 
of its connections being membranous. External to this articulation the ventral rim of the 
fenestra, it may be remembered, is formed by the edge of the gena, which edge is con- 
tinued without a break outwards to the region of the anterior opening of the tentorium, 
where it links up with the outer end of the suspensorium. In the imago the portion of the 
ventral rim of the fenestra linking up the point of articulation of the mandible with the 
suspensorium has remained as the now isolated small suspensory sclerite, other parts, 
except what remains of the suspensorium, having ceased to be represented. A small outer 
portion of the suspensorium, sufficient to give attachment to the suspensory sclerite, has 
remained as the genal shelf (Fig. 53 (5) md). It is again a matter of the changes in the 
imaginal parts brought about by the great recession in the whole clypeal region with the 
great reduction in the diameter of the bases of the mouth appendages. 
THE MAXILLAE (Fig. 54 (2), (3), (5)) 
The maxillae of the imago, like those of the larva, are present as free structures only as the 
portions distal to the origin of the maxillary palps, the basal portions being in the form of 
the apodematous rods already described. The free portion consists of an inner stylet, the 
maxilla of authors, more correctly the gaka of the generalised insect maxilla, and an 
outer five-jointed maxillary palp. The galea (ga) is a long, rather stiff ribbon-like stylet, the 
inner edge of which is formed by a rod-like thickening and its outer portion by a thin even 
flange marked by transverse striations. At its base the galea is thickened and lies along the 
lateral edge of the labium after articulating with the maxillary apodeme of its side. In the 
proboscis the galeae lie along the ventral side of the hypopharynx, one on each side of the 
midrib. Apically the galea ends in a characteristic curved point carrying teeth. The teeth are 
borne on the external edge, that is on the side of the flange. The striations of the flange, 
however, cease at the level of the most basal tooth and from this point to the termi- 
nation the stylet is rigid (Fig. 54 (5)). In A. aegypti the teeth are very regularly twelve in 
number. The more proximal seven or eight are large and blunt and only very slightly re- 
curved at the point. They rather call to mind some form of mammalian molar teeth and 
are implanted in the substance of the maxillary tip. The terminal four teeth or so are more 
sharp pointed and increasingly recurved so that the last tooth or two are very fine and 
strongly curved with sharp points. 
The five-jointed female maxillary palp consists of two small segments at the base, then 
two longer segments forming the greater part of the length of the organ and a minute 
globular apical segment. 
In the male the maxillae are short, only about a third of the length of the proboscis, very 
slightly sclerotised and devoid of teeth and the characteristic striation of the female organ. 
As will be seen from the section dealing with the mechanism of feeding, the maxillary 
stylets are extremely important structures as it is by their forward and backward rapid 
movements that penetration by the fascicle is brought about. 
THE FASCICLE 
The fascicle is formed by all the six stylets held together by surface tension acting as a 
single organ. At rest as described by Gordon and Lumsden the labrum occupies the front 
of the fascicle, the ends of the maxillary blades lying side by side beneath it with their 
430 
THE MOUTH-PARTS 
teeth projecting at its sides. In action the point of the fascicle advances into the tissues in 
a series of minute thrusts in the manner of a pneumatic drill, the maxillae in rapid move- 
ment of small magnitude cutting into the tissues but never advanced in front of the labrum. 
For further information see the section on the mechanism of feeding, p. 486. 
Some importance attaches to the measurements of the mouth-parts, since upon such 
largely depends the ability of the insect to penetrate fabrics. The proboscis excluding the 
labella measures in length in an average-sized female A. aegypti 2.32 mm. and with the 
labella 2.5 mm. At the base it is 0.12 mm. in width and depth; at the apex 0.10 and 
0.08 mm. respectively in width and depth. The fascicle measures in width 0.06 mm. at 
the base and 0.04 at the apex. At the apex its depth is 0.03 mm. The blood channel is 
approximately circular in outline and measures 0.025 mm. (25,~) in diameter. 
(c) THE NECK AND THORAX 
THE NECK (Figs. 53 (3); 55 (4)) 
The neck links the head with the thorax. Though it is to a considerable extent membranous 
it receives very substantial rigid support from the cervical sclerite (csc). The cervical sclerite 
is shaped something like the letter H, the cross piece of the H forming a bar across the 
ventral aspect of the neck, the upper arms articulating with the margin of the occipital 
foramen in its dorsal portion and the lower arms with the prothorax ventrally. This gives 
a double-hinged strut on each side of the neck which, while allowing the head to be 
extended or brought backwards, gives complete rigidity. In A. aegypti what may be 
likened to the sides of the H are expanded into substantial broad plates covering much of 
the lateral aspects of the neck. Seen from in front the sclerite has much the appearance of 
a broad collar. Such parts of the neck as are not occupied by the cervical sclerites are 
membranous, the membrane being evenly covered with regularly situated tiny spots 
formed by circles of minute microtrichae-like elevations. * 
THE THORAX (Fig. 55; 56 (1)) 
The thorax of the mosquito is formed of numerous sclerites the nature and nomenclature 
of which have been the subject of study by a number of authors. According to Crampton 
(1909) the first to give nomenclature to the parts in insects was Audouin in 1820. Certain 
of the parts in the mosquito have been variously interpreted and named, see Snodgrass 
(1912); Christophers (1915); Prashad (1918); Patton and Evans (1929); Edwards (1921, 
1932) ; Christophers (1933) ; Barraud (1934) ; Komp (1937). The nomenclature now very 
generally accepted is that given by Edwards (1941) in his treatise on Ethiopian mosquitoes; 
see also Natvig (1948). For thoracic parts in insects see Crampton (1909, 1914, 1942) and 
especially Snodgrass (1927, 1935). 
The thorax in the mosquito is large and massive, with an extensive convex dorsal surface 
and extensive flat pleurae which converge ventrally to the narrow coxal origins, giving to 
the structure as a whole a wedge shape, or, since the coxae arise from a relatively small 
area and both the anterior and posterior surfaces of the thorax are rather flat, the shape is 
more correctly that of an inverted pyramid with the base broadly rounded and compressed 
somewhat laterally. 
* For information on the cervical sclerites in insects see Crampton (1917,1926), Martin (1916), Snodgrass (1935). 
431 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
It consists of pro-, meso- and metathorax, the greater bulk being mesothorax. Dorso- 
laterally it carries the wings and halteres and ventrally the three pairs of legs. Laterally 
on the pleurae are the large meso- and metathoracic spiracles. It is highly ornamented 
with white and silvery white markings, giving on the dorsum the well-known lyre-shaped 
effect (Fig. 55 (I)), which except for a few related species with rather similar markings is 
characteristic. 
THE PROTHORAX 
If the fore part of the thorax bearing the anterior pair of legs be detached and mounted 
without undue pressure, an adequate picture of the prothoracic segment will be obtained 
(Fig. 55 (4)). On each side of the neck space in its dorsal half are the conspicuous pro- 
thoracic lobes, or anterior pronotal lobes (apn), and between these a median area where pro- 
notal structure appears to be absent, the large overhanging anterior promontory of the 
mesonotum (Fig. 55 (4)) occupying the gap. Dissection will show, however, that there is 
in this situation an apodeme projecting inwards from the suture at the base of the meso- 
notum not so far noted by any author, but well displayed in stained potash preparations. 
This would appear to be the first phragma by the notation of Snodgrass, and strictly 
speaking belongs to the mesothoracic acrotergite, primitively part of the prothoracic 
segment. It would seem in this case sufficiently correct to term it the pronotal apodeme 
(Fig. 55 (4), (5) A pna). From this laterally there proceeds backwards on each side a long 
apodematous rod referred to below. The anterior pronotal lobes in A. aegypti carry 
conspicuous patches of flat white scales. They also carry a line and apical clump of bristles, 
the anterior prono tal chaetae. 
Ventral to the anterior pronotal lobes the neck opening is encircled by the arms of a 
large median shield-shaped sclerite which pass up on each side to articulate with the lobes. 
The shield-shaped sclerite is the prothoracic sternum, prosternum (S. I), and the arms are 
part at least of the prothoracic pleura, propleura (PI. 1). The prosternum in most species of 
Culicini, including A. aegypti, is bare of scales. It has a strong median suture. Lateral to it, 
linked by membrane, lie the anterior coxae, with the lower inner border of which its 
Figure 55. The thorax. 
Dorsal view of head and thorax to show ornamentation. 
The same to show structure and chaetotaxy. a, scutal angle; b, bare area. 
Lateral view of thorax to show pleural sclerites and chaetotaxy. 
Anterior view of neck and thorax. 
A, pronotal apodeme; B, sternopleural bridge and furca 1. a, the sternopleural bridge; 
b, apodematous ring behind prosternum; c, thickened anterior margin of sternopleuron; 
d, branches of furca extending towards neck. 
Anterior view of hind coxae and metasternum. 
Posterior view of hind coxae showing furca 3. a, membranous area at back of coxae. 
Lettering: apn, anterior pronotal lobe; csc, cervical sclerite; cx. l-3, coxae l-3 ; fu. 3, furca 3 ; 
ha, haltere ; k’, small clear space ; me, mesepimeron ; mes, mesepimeral suture ; mr, meron ; mt, meta- 
notum; mtr, metameron; iV, neck; PI. 1, propleuron; pa, prealar knob ; pna, pronotal apodeme; 
ppn, posterior pronotal area; psp, postspiracular area; ptg, paratergite; ptn, postnotum; S. l-3, 
sternites 1-3; Sp. l-2, spiracles of meso- and metathorax; SC, scutum; sc.p, anterior promontory; 
set, scutellum; so, sensory pits ; ssp, subspiracular area; stp, sternopleuron; tr, trochanter; 
W, wing. 
432 
0 
0 00 
Oo 0 sc.p 00 .:. . . I. 
‘....),._‘ . . ‘.‘.: ‘s; * 
“.‘..._“.:‘.. I’ 
“... 
-:::.._. 4 .+ m .:’ ,’ A -. 
Pna 
Figure 55 
28 433 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
posterior border near the middle line articulates (Fig. 55 (3), (4) cx. 1). On each side 
anteriorly it is prolonged into the propleurae. At the base of each propleura is a prominent 
boss carrying a conspicuous patch of flat white scales and dark chaetae (propleural chaetae). 
From the region of the boss there projects ventrally a long spur-like process which articu- 
lates with the anterior coxa near its upper margin. Extending from the boss dorsally is the 
arm that articulates with the anterior pronotal lobe of its side. With the inner margin of 
this arm the ventral cornu of the cervical sclerite articulates. 
Behind the anterior pronotal lobe on each side and forming part of the pleura is a flat 
somewhat circular sclerite carrying on its posterior border a ridge and a line of chaetae 
situated a little anterior to the mesothoracic spiracle. The dorsal border lies close along the 
lateral border of the anterior promontory separated by a membranous suture. The sclerite 
is considered by Edwards to be pronotal in origin and has been termed the posterior pro- 
notal area (Fig. 55 (3) ppn). It is bare of scales, but readily picked out by its characteristic 
shape. The line of chaetae at its posterior border are the posterior pronotal chaetae, not to 
be confused with a line of chaetae present in some genera on a narrow area beyond the 
ridge and nearer to the spiracle termed the spiracular chaetae. Passing internal to its 
upper portion and attached at its end to the posterior border of the posterior pronotal area 
is the thin rod-shaped apodeme coming from the pronotal apodeme referred to above 
(Fig. 55 (3) apn). The presence of this extension from the phragma would seem to be in 
favour of the view that the area now being described is correctly considered as pronotal in 
origin. 
Ventrally the posterior pronotal area is limited by two lines of thickening, but is con- 
tinued beyond these without break into another smooth area of the pleura rather non- 
committally named the subspiracular area (ssp) and a further extension backwards from this 
to lie in front of the large sternopleuron of the mesothorax is the postspiracular area (psp). 
Whether these are prothoracic or mesothoracic is perhaps doubtful. They are both given 
by Edwards as parts of the mesothoracic pleura. They are, however, more connected with 
the posterior pronotal area than with the sternopleuron from which they are separated by 
a strong suture. Both areas, however, are intimately connected with the sternopleuron at a 
sort of meeting place or knot in the region of the propleural boss and coxal junction, where 
also the furcal system of the prothorax has connections. On the subspiracular area at this 
point is a curious small clear spot (Fig. 55 (3) k’). The postspiracular area in A. aegypti 
carries a small patch of white scales and some chaetae (postspiracular chaetae). 
The names given above are those now very generally accepted. But certain other terms 
have been in use which it is desirable to mention. Thus the propleuron and the posterior 
pronotal area were considered to represent the usual two pleural sclerites, namely, the epi- 
sternum and epimeron of the prothorax, and were therefore termed respectively pro- 
episternum and pro-epimeron. Other names, notably by Peus (1933) (see Natvig, 1948), 
have also been used for some of the parts. 
THE MESOTHORAX AND METATHORAX 
The scutum and related parts (Fig. 55 (2), (3)). Dorsally almost the whole of the thorax is 
composed of the greatly developed mesonotum, consisting of scutum, scutellum and post- 
notum, the metathorax being here represented only by an insignificant narrow band behind 
the postnotum. The greater portion is formed by the scutum (SC). This is a large domed 
434 
THE NECK AND THORAX 
structure providing space for the greatly developed indirect wing muscles. There is no 
suture dividing it into prescutum and scutum as in some Diptera and in the mosquito it is 
usual to apply the term scutum to the whole. Anteriorly the scutum projects forwards over 
the neck as the anterior promontory (sc.p) and laterally, at about the junction of the anterior 
and middle third, it is produced into somewhat pointed angles, the scutal angles (Fig. 55 
(2) a). For some distance behind the scutal angles the lateral borders are continued down- 
wards at an angle into the pleurae as small triangular pieces, theparatergites (Fig. 55 (3)ptg). 
Some way further back the sides are expanded above the wing roots where they are heavily 
clothed with scales and chaetae. Posteriorly the scutum is separated from the bar-like 
scutellum by a deep transverse groove and just anterior to this groove in the middle line 
is a small triangular area free from scales known as the bare space (Fig. 55 (2) b). Apart 
from the bare space the whole surface of the scutum is clothed with narrow curved scales 
which produce the ornamentation already described. Patches of white flat scales are 
present, however, on the paratergites and less markedly on the sides of the anterior pro- 
montory. The chaetae carried by the scutum will be described later in the section on 
chaetotaxy. 
Posterior to the scutum is the scutellum (set). As is general in the Culicini the scutellum 
is three-lobed, as distinct from the more uniformly convex part in the Anophelini. Each 
lobe bears a particularly conspicuous patch of flat white scales and its own cluster of black 
chaetae. From the under aspect of each lateral lobe there rises a long thin ridge which is 
continued into the wing as the posterior wing root (Fig. 58 (4) pwr). 
Posterior to the scutellum is a characteristic smooth and bare area, the postnotum (ptn). 
This is considered to be phragmal in nature and represents the second phragma of Snod- 
grass. On its inner surface it receives the attachment of the longitudinal indirect wing 
muscles, which pass the scutellum to be inserted into the postnotum. 
Dorsally the metathorax forms on each side of the postnotum a somewhat triangular 
area from the outer border of which the halteres take origin (Fig. 55 (2) mt). Linking these 
behind the postnotum and separated by a suture from this structure, is a narrow uniform 
band which represents the metathorax dorsally in the middle line. It has no setae or other 
special features. Behind it is membrane with, posterior to this, the anterior line of 
thickening (acrotergite) of the first abdominal tergite. 
The meso- and metathoracic pleurae (Fig. 55 (3)). The mesothorax forms the greater part 
of the pleural areas of the thorax posterior to the parts already described as prothoracic. 
In the upper anterior angle is the large mesothoracic spiracle (Sp. 1) and posterior to this is 
a small depressed membranous area lying ventral to the small triangular paratergite (ptg) 
with its conspicuous white scale patch. Still further back in front of the wing root is a very 
prominent knob carrying a conspicuous tuft of hairs, the pre-alar knob (pa). Continued 
obliquely downwards to between the mid and hind coxae from this knob is the large con- 
spicuous sclerite, the sternopleuron (stp). Its upper part is narrow, ending at the pre-alar 
knob, but below it forms a wide smooth area eventually passing between the coxae to the 
ventral surface of the thorax. It carries conspicuous patches of flat white scales, notably a 
large patch about its middle already referred to as a useful landmark in ascertaining body 
proportions. In addition, there is a smaller patch on its lower border above the coxa. 
Besides the pre-alar chaetae on the pre-alar knob it carries a line of small chaetae along its 
length near its posterior border, sternopleural chaetae. Posterior to the sternopleuron is 
435 28-2 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
the almost equally large quadrangular shaped mes-epimeron (me). Dorsally the mes- 
epimeron extends up to below the wing root where it makes important connections with 
certain of the wing root sclerites (see subsection on the wings). At its lower border there is 
a peculiar and unmistakable fold and suture separating it from a small convex area called 
the meron (mr). The mes-epimeron carries two patches of flat white scales, one above the 
other and on its upper part a number of chaetae, upper mes-epimeral chaetae. Lower mes- 
epimeral chaetae are wanting in Ai;des aegypti. Between it and the sternopleuron is an 
important suture, extending between the middle coxa and the wing, the two sclerites on 
either side of it and the suture forming the usual arrangement of the parts in the standard- 
ised insect pleura of a wing segment. The suture in this case is the mes-epimeral (mes). 
The meron in insect taxonomy is a sclerite originally forming part of the coxa which in 
some forms, including the mosquito, has become attached to the thorax and become a part 
of this structure (Snodgrass, 1935, p. 196). The meron is connected to the middle coxa. 
A small sclerite at the base of the hind coxa has been variously interpreted, but has been 
termed by Edwards the metameron (mtr). 
Posterior to the mes-epimeron is a recessed triangular area on the upper part of which is 
the metathoracic spiracle (Sp. 2). This area on its more dorsal portion carries the haltere (ha). 
At its lower end is the metameron, which appears as a small, almost isolated structure above 
the hind coxa apparently appended to the back of the metathorax on each side (Fig. 55 (7)). 
The sternal area and coxae (Fig. 55 (4), (7); 56 (l), (5)). The coxae form so intimate a 
part of the thorax that, though strictly speaking they are basal joints of the legs, it is most 
convenient to consider them when dealing with the sternal areas of the thorax. The thorax 
being wedge-shaped and very narrow ventrally, the lower borders of the coxae of the two 
sides are articulated almost to the middle line leaving only the narrowest space for the 
sternal parts between them. Each coxa may be considered as an elongate cylinder the 
upper part of which has been sliced off at a low angle leaving a long inner surface by which 
it is articulated to the thorax. The upper end of this surface is narrow and is applied to the 
pleura. The lower end is broad and circular and applied to the sternal area. The edges are 
linked to the thorax largely by membrane, but, especially in the fore coxae, there is an 
articular junction with the pleural sclerites dorsally and with the sternal elements ventrally. 
Thus in order of first, second and third coxa they articulate dorsally respectively with the 
propleura, with the lower ends of the sternopleuron and mes-epimeron and with the meta- 
pleuron. Ventrally all come in contact with their respective sternites near the middle line. 
The middle coxa is peculiar in that it is hollowed out basally and below this hollow forms a 
prominent bulge (Fig. 55 (6) cx. 2). 
The sternal parts are difficult to examine as they are largely overlaid by the coxae and 
being much reduced and modified are not easy to define. With the exception of the more 
obvious prosternum they have not been described. Even if of no systematic importance, 
however, it seems desirable that some description of them should be put on record. The 
following method has been found useful in their study. 
A spirit-hardened mosquito is placed on its side on a slab of paraffin under the dis- 
secting microscope and rigidly fixed by thrusting a fine stainless steel pin through the 
thorax into the wax. With a sharp razor or mounted fragment of a Gillette blade the 
specimen is now cut down upon in such direction as it is thought will best display the 
parts. The detached portion is then passed through any necessary alcohols to 10 per cent 
436 
THE NECK AND THORAX 
potash where it is left, preferably at a warm temperature, for a day or more and removed to 
distilled water for a like time. After deeply staining with fuchsin in 70 per cent alcohol it is 
passed through alcohols, carbon xylol to a drop of canada balsam on a slide and after 
examination and suitable arrangement mounted without pressure. Some remarkable 
preparations can be made in this way. 
Taken in order from before backwards the sternal structures are as follows. Between the 
anterior surfaces of the two fore coxae is the relatively broad prosternum already described 
with its deep median suture and double pointed posterior end (Fig. 55 (4)). Lying internally 
to the prosternum at its posterior end is a rather complex ring of apodeme from which there ’ 
projects forwards on each side what may be termed the first furca (Fig. 55 (5) B). Just 
posterior to this point is the peculiar bar joining the lower ends of the sternopleura across 
the middle line as noted by Nuttall and Shipley in Anopheles (Fig. 55 (5) B a). Behind the 
bar is an area formed by two small plates separated by a median suture and largely folded 
together in a V-shaped fashion. Laterally these plates send out extensions which pass 
anterior to the bases of the middle coxae. They also largely encircle the coxae on their 
inner side and appear to represent the mesothoracic sternite or some portion of this 
(Fig. 55 (5) B). From the region of these plates there extends into the thorax a complex 
apodematous extension which may be considered to be the secondfirca (Fig. 56 (1)). Still 
more posteriorly there is a deep depression largely separating off the hind coxae and their 
associated basal structures from the parts anterior to this and in this depression is a further 
double plate from which lateral extensions pass to the region of the meron (Fig. 55 (6)). 
From now on the sternal area is membranous, forming a V-shaped area between the hind 
coxae anteriorly and a similar area posteriorly, as is well seen examining the thorax from 
the posterior aspect (Fig. 55 (7)). On the more posterior of these membranous areas in the 
middle line is a line of apodematous suture continued at its upper end into the thorax as 
a characteristically shaped fork which may be termed the thirdfurca (fu. 3). 
The furcae when suitably exhibited are striking structures. They may be briefly described 
as follows. 
Furca 1. Rises at the posterior end, of the prothoracic sternum as an angular rather 
ring-like apodeme from which extensions pass out laterally, namely one continuous with 
the greatly thickened anterior border of the sternopleuron and one, a free apodeme, 
passing forwards towards the neck and bifurcating. 
Furca 2. Rises from the region of the mesosternum as a median thickening from which 
arise two arms forming a flattened U, each of which is expanded at the tip in a bell-shaped 
manner (Fig. 56 (1)). 
Furca 3. Enters the thorax posteriorly just anterior to the ventral wall of the abdomen 
where this joins the thorax. It resembles a two pronged hay-fork. 
The furcae give attachment to muscles, most of which are massive and fully occupy all 
available surface given by the furcal extensions. 
Before concluding the description of the thoracic parts, mention may be made of the 
relation of the meron and metameron to the sternal structures. The meron terminates after 
passing for a short distance onto the anterior wall of the depression between the bases of 
the middle and hind coxae (Fig. 55 (6)). The metameron of each side, when seen in posterior 
view, is perched above the base of the hind coxa on the lateral parts of the posterior surface 
of the thorax below the attachment of the abdomen. It has no particular attachments or 
extensions on its inner side (Fig. 55 (7)). 
437 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
THE THORACIC CHAETAE 
The chaetae of the thorax have already been largely indicated,and named in the foregoing 
sections. The following is a seriatim list: 
PROTHORACIC 
1. Anterior pronotal. Usually an apical double row and a line around the base of the lobe. 
2. Posterior pronotal. A line of about eight hairs along the posterior margin of the posterior 
pronotal sclerite (anterior to the marginal crest). 
3. Propleural. A line of about eight hairs on the propleural process. 
4. Posterior spiracular. Usually about four hairs on the postspiracular plate. 
MESONOTAL 
5. Lateral anterior mesonotal. A cluster of hairs on each lateral angle of the anterior promon- 
tory continuing posteriorly into 7. 
6. Median anterior mesonotal. A small cluster anteriorly in the middle line on the anterior 
promontory. 
7. Dorso-central. A single line of spaced stout chaetae passing backwards from 5 to a short 
distance in front of the lateral lobe of the scutellum.* 
8. Postero-medial. A V-shaped line of small hairs in the middle line, a little in front of the 
posterior bare space. 
9. Antero-marginal. A few hairs on the edge of the scutum above the posterior pronotal area. 
10. Postero-marginal. A conspicuous line and cluster of small and medium hairs on the margin 
of the scutum above and behind the paratergite. 
11. Supra-alar. A dense cluster of large hairs above the wing roots. This is the largest cluster 
of chaetae on the body. It sends forwards a line of some large chaetae between 10 and 7. A single 
hair isolated from the group lies always above the scutal flange (scutalflange hair). 
12. Median scuteZZar. A circumscribed bunch of large chaetae on the middle lobe of the 
scutellum. 
13. Lateral scutellar. A similar circumscribed bunch on each lateral lobe. 
MESOPLEURAL 
14. Sternopleural. A line of about six hairs along the posterior border of the sternopleuron 
about its middle. The most dorsal hair situated more anteriorly. 
15. Pre-alar. A cluster of stout chaetae (usually about twelve hairs) on the pre-alar knob. 
16. Upper mes-epimeral. About six small hairs on the upper part of the mes-epimeron below 
the subalar sclerite. The lower mesepimeral chaetae are unrepresented. 
Spiracular chaetae, and also the lower mesepimeral are absent. No chaetae are present 
on the metathorax. 
REFERENCES 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). Fauna of British India. Diptera. Vol. v, Culicini, p. 29. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1915). Pilotaxy of Anopheles. Ind. J. Med. Res. 3, 362-70. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1933). Fauna of British India. Diptera. Vol. IV, Anophelini, p. 15. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R., SHORT, H. E. and BARRAUD, P. J. (1926). The anatomy of the sandfly 
Phlebotomus argentipes. I. The head and mouth parts of the imago. Ind. Med. Res. Mem. 
no. 4, 177-204. 
COMSTOCK, J. H. (1920). An Introduction to Entomology. Ed. 2. Comstock Publ. Co., Ithaca, 
New York. 
CONSTANTINEANU, M. J. (1930). See references in ch. XIV (d-e), p. 351. 
* A line of hairs in the middle line of the scutum, acrostichal setae, are absent in AL;des aegypti and most 
Stegomyia. Both the dorso-central and the acrostichal setae are important taxonomically (Mattingly, in Zit.). 
438 
REFERENCES 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1909). A contribution to the comparative morphology of the thoracic sclerites 
of insects. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philad. 1909, l-53. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1914). The ground plan of a typical thoracic segment in winged insects. 
2001. Anz. 44, 56-67. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1917). The nature of the veracervix or neck region in insects. Ann. Ent. Sot. 
Amer. 10, 187-97. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1921). The sclerites of the head and the mouthparts of certain immature and 
adult insects. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 14, 65-103. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1926). A comparison of the neck and prothoracic sclerites throughout the 
orders of insects etc. Trans. Amer. Ent. Sot. 52, 199-248. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1942). External morphology of the Diptera. A guide to the insects of Connecti- 
cut. Part VI. Connect. State Geo. and Nat. Hist. Survey. Bull. 64, 10-165. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1881). Anatomy of the Mouthparts and of the Sucking Apparatus of some Diptera. 
Thesis, Leipzig. A. Williams and Co., Boston. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1883). Anatomy of the mouth-parts and suctorial apparatus of Culex. Psyche, 3, 
231-41. 
DYAR, H. G. (1928). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1921, 1932, 1941). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
GORDON, R. M. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1939). A study of the behaviour of the mouth-parts of 
mosquitoes etc. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 33, 259-78. 
JOBLING, B. (1928). The structure of the head and mouth-parts in Culicoidespulicaris L. (Diptera : 
Nematocera). Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 211-36. 
KOMP, W. H. W. (1937). The nomenclature of the thoracic sclerites in the Culicidae and their 
setae. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 39, 241-52. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1887). Poison fangs and glands of the mosquito. Science, 10, 106-7. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1888). The poison apparatus of the mosquito. Amer. Nat. 22, 884-8. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), London. 
MARSHALL, J. F. and STALEY, J. (1935). Generic and subgeneric differences in the mouth-parts of 
male mosquitoes. Bull. Ent. Res. 26, 531-2. 
MARTIN, J. F. (1916). The thoracic and cervical sclerites of insects. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 9,35-83. 
NATVIG, L. R. (1948). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 46. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1901-3). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., Camb., 
1, 459-67; 3, 167-70. 
PATTON, W. S. and CRAGG, F. W. (1913). Textbook of Medical Entomology. London. 
PATTON, W. S. and EVANS, A. M. (1929). Z nsects, ticks, mites, etc. Lpool Sch. Trop. Medicine. 
PETERSEN, A. (19 16). The head capsule and mouthparts of Diptera. ZZZinois BioZ. Monogr. 3, 
no. 2, 171-284. 
PEUS, F. (1933). Zur Kenntnis der Acdes-arten des deutschen Faunengebietes, etc. Konowia, 12, 
145-59. Quoted by Natvig, p. 10. 
PRASHAD, B. (1918). The thorax and wing of the mosquito. Znd. J. Med. Res. 5, 610-40. 
ROBINSON, G. G. (1939). The mouth parts and their function in the female mosquito Anopheles 
maculipennis. Parasitology, 31, 212-42. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1912). The thorax of Psorophora ciliata. In Howard, Dyar and Knab, 1,55-9. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1927). Morphology and mechanism of the insect thorax. Smithson. Misc. 
CoZZ. 80, no. 1. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). The Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York and London. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1943). The feeding apparatus of biting and sucking insects affecting man and 
animals. Smithson. Misc. CoZZ. 104, no. 1. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1953). The metamorphosis of a fly’s head. Smithson. Misc. CoZZ. 122, no. 3. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 
32, 145-202. 
VOGEL, R. (1921). Kritische und erganzende Mitteilungen zur Anatomie des Stechapparats der 
Culiciden und Tabaniden. ZooZ. Jb., Abt. Anat. 42, 259-82. 
439 
XIX 
THE IMAGO: 
EXTERNAL CHARACTERS (cont.) 
(d) THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
The appendages of the thorax are the three pairs of legs pertaining respectively to the pro-, 
meso- and metathoracic segments and named respectively first, second and third, or fore, 
mid and hind pairs, the wings pertaining to the mesothorax and the halteres, pertaining to 
the metathorax. 
THE LEGS (Fig.49) 
Each leg consists of a basal segment, the coxa, a small linking segment, the trochanter, with 
femur, tibia and five-jointed tarsus, the last tarsal segment carrying the tarsal claws or 
ungues. 
The coxae (Fig. 55 (3), (6), (7); 56 (1)). The relations of the coxae with the thorax have been 
described in the previous section. At their distal ends they articulate with the small second 
segment, the trochanter, the lower margin of each coxa being deeply excavated to allow for 
the presence of the trochanter when the legs are drawn up, that is, anteriorly for the fore- 
legs, externally for the mid-legs and posteriorly for the hind-legs. The three coxae carry a 
spaced row of setae respectively on their anterior, external and posterior aspects, and also 
a close row or cluster on their inner apices. They also all carry conspicuous patches of flat 
white scales, a V-shaped patch on the fore-coxa, two small patches externally on the mid- 
coxa and a large patch both externally and internally on the hind-coxa. Each of the coxae 
also carries one or more groups of sensory pits (so). One such is present on the first coxa 
anteriorly about the middle of its inner margin. On the middle coxa there is a double line 
of about four sensory pits each on the edge of its anterior border just below its attachment 
to the sternopleuron. On the hind-coxa there is a group of sensory pits on its anterior 
border near its base and a tiny group on the edge of the membrane about two-thirds of the 
way down posteriorly (Fig. 55 (6), (7); 56 (1) so). There is also a small group of sensory pits 
on the membrane behind the mid-coxa near the termination of the meron. 
The trochanters. These are short cylindrical segments which articulate by a hinge joint 
with the coxa and by a peculiar ball joint with the femur, the rounded end of which projects 
into the trochanter. Each trochanter is more or less bent so that the planes of its articular 
surfaces are at an angle, thus assisting the femur in making the acute angle which it does 
with the coxa when in flexion by taking up some of the necessary arc. Near the upper 
margin of each trochanter is a small ridge on each side of which is a group of sensory pits 
(Fig. 56 (4), (9) A, a, b). 
The femora. Each femur at its articulation with the trochanter has a somewhat contracted 
neck with a smooth convex, almost hemispherical, projecting head composed of con- 
spicuously dark sclerotised cuticle, the result of the articulation almost amounting to a ball 
440 
THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
and socket joint (Fig. 56 (4) e). Just distal to the neck on the ventral surface of all the 
femora is a rounded swelling on which are two longitudinally arranged lines of sensory pits 
of a larger size than those so far mentioned (Fig. 56 (5) b). At their distal ends the femora 
articulate with the tibiae, a row of spines dorsally projecting over the joint. They also have 
sparsely spaced inconspicuous spines along their length projecting from among the scales, 
most marked in the apical portion and in the hind femora. 
The tibiae. The tibiae at their articulation with the femora are somewhat constricted with 
two lateral convex darkly sclerotised expansions which are received into the hollow of the 
femur end and constitute what might be termed a dicondylic ball and socket hinge joint 
(Fig. 56 (6)). At their apices the tibiae, especially those of the fore- and hind-legs, are 
expanded and on the inner aspect of the fore- and hind-tibiae there is a triangular area of 
fine parallel hairs giving a comb-like effect and suggesting the cleaning brushes of some 
lemurs (Fig. 56 (8)). The tibiae also carry apical spines and small spines along their length. 
Since the above was written and the drawing given in the figure made, Mattingly (in lit.) 
informs me that distal to the triangular area referred to there exists at the apex of the fore- 
tibia an extremely regular ‘ tibia1 rake’ consisting of a row of straight closely packed spines 
strongly attached at their base. These are best seen after scraping away the triangular 
patch of spines which to some extent overlies them. Mattingly and Hamon (1955) also 
describe at the apex of the fore-tibia in many groups including some AL;des, but not so far 
in Stegomyia, a small spine that may resemble (in some Ficalbia) a tarsal claw. A study of 
the presence of the claw in various genera has been made by Mattingly and Grjebine (1957). 
The tarsal segments. These are five in number, decreasing in size from the first to the fifth, 
except in the male where in the fore- and mid-legs the fourth segment is unduly short, little 
more than half the length of the fifth (Fig. 56 (2) D). The segments are for the most part 
long, narrow and evenly cylindrical and, especially in the hind-legs, carry fairly numerous 
spines along their length. The fifth segment carries the tarsal claws or ungues. The tarsal 
joints are of the hinge type with a long anteriorly projecting spur on the proximal end of the 
distal segment which extends some distance into the preceding segment and receives the 
long tendon to the segment (Fig. 56 (7) A, B). 
The tarsal claws (Fig. 56 (2), (3)). These differ in the male and female and on the different 
legs. Their characters have considerable systematic importance as well as indicating the 
sex. Thus the claws in the female on some of the legs at least are usually toothed in Acde,s, 
but simple in Culex. The development of pulvilli into pubescent lobes characteristic of 
Culex is also restricted to this genus. The following is the arrangement in the two sexes in 
AZdes aegyp ti. Fore-leg Mid-leg Hind-leg 
Male One very large outer. One very large outer. Two small simple 
Uniserrate Simple 
One large inner. One large inner. - 
Simple Simple 
Female Two large. 
Uniserrate Two medium 
Uniserrate sized. Two small simple 
The claws, one inner and one outer, are borne on membrane at the end of the terminal 
tarsal segment, which is hollowed out to some extent with a thickened rim where the 
membrane is attached. Between the claws in the middle line of the membrane ventrally is 
a thickening marked with transverse ridges which forms a pad and continues as a tuft of 
441 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
hairs of considerable length in the fore- and mid-ungues of the male. This constitutes the 
empodium (Fig. 56 (2) A b). There does not appear to be any structure that can be taken as 
representing the pulvilli. At the base of the tarsal claws on the dorsal margin of the tarsal 
segment is a thickening to which the claw is attached, the unguifer (Fig. 56 (2) A a). The 
ventral margin of the segment is also more or less thickened forming, in the fore-tarsus of 
the male what amounts to a blunt spur (Fig. 56 (2) A (6)). 
Ornamentation of the legs (see under ‘ Ornamentation’ in ch. XVII, p. 400) is of importance 
in identification of species, especially the presence and character of tarsal banding and to a 
less extent of markings on the femora and tibiae. The markings are due to scaling, but the 
pale and dark colour of the underlying cuticle often accords with this. Figures of the leg 
ornamentation of A. aegypti and some other species of Stegomyia are given by Edwards 
(1941).* 
THE WING (Fig. 57) 
For good short general accounts of the wing and its attachments in insects see Comstock 
(1920) ; Snodgrass (1935); Imms (1938). For description of the mosquito wing and its 
venation see Nuttall and Shipley (1901) ; Shipley and Wilson (1902) (base of wing) ; 
Prashad (19 18) ; Christophers and Barraud (1924) (pupal wing tracheation) ; Christophers 
(1933) ; Barraud (1934); Edwards (1941) ; Natvig (1948). For description of the basal 
sclerites and attachments of the mosquito wing see Prashad (1918) who is the only author 
who has made a detailed study of the mosquito wing in this respect. 
As in other mosquitoes the wings in A. aegypti are rather narrow structures about four 
times as long as their greatest breadth and shaped not unlike an aeroplane propeller blade. 
They consist of thin membrane, wing membrane, strengthened by lines of thickening, 
nervures or veins, the arrangement of which constitutes the venation. The membrane is 
free from scales, but is closely covered with minute hairs, microtrichae. The veins are 
* For the structure of the insect leg in general see Snodgrass (1935), pp. 193-209; also Dahl(1884), Crampton and 
Hasey (1915), Gillett and Wigglesworth (1932), lmms (1938). For the general plan of the arthropod leg and nomen- 
clature of the parts see Ewing (1928), Snodgrass (1935), pp. 83-99. A simple account of the parts in the crayfish 
is given by Huxley (1906). On the tarsal claws in mosquitoes see Edwards (1912). 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 Figure 56. Thoracic appendages : the legs. 
Posterior view of the mesosternal area and mid-coxae. a, furca 2; b, mesosternum; c, trans- 
verse apodeme. 
Male ungues. A, fore-leg; B, mid-leg; c, hind-leg; D, fore-tarsus (segments 4-5). a, unguifer 
process; b, empodium; c, spur. 
Female ungues. Lettering as for 2. 
Trochanter and head of femur of fore-leg. Anterior view. a-d, different groups of sensory 
pits; e, sclerotised extension of femur. 
Head of femur of hind-leg. Ventral view. a, sclerotised extension of femur; b, sensory organ 
shown at 4c more highly magnified. 
Femoro-tibia1 joint. Fore-leg. 
Tarsal joint. A, lateral view; B, dorsal view. 
Inner aspect of apex of fore-tibia showing hair organ. 
Sensory organs. A, of trochanter as shown at 4a, b; B, of coxa as shown at 1 so; C, of coxa 
as shown at Fig. 55 (6). 
10 Coronal section through paired ocelli of frontal area. Newly emerged female. 
Lettering: cx. 2, mid-coxa; oc’, cuticular thickening resembling lens ; so, sensory pits. 
442 
b 
C 
0 
0 
+ 
-& 7 
B 
O-05 mm. 2 
I @lmm. I 
8 
002 mm. 
, 1 10 
Figure 56 5 C 3 
I @lmm. , 
, ~1n-m , 6 
9 
443 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
clothed with scales forming the wing vestiture, which is often characteristic for particular 
genera or species. The male wing is in general similar to that of the female, but besides 
being smaller is somewhat narrower in proportion to its length and has a broader apical 
fringe. It differs also in some other respects as mentioned later. 
The wing is attached to the thorax largely through the intervention of a complicated 
system of small sclerites as described later. It has a straight thickened scaled anterior edge 
formed by the costa (C), a rounded apex (apx) and a convex posterior border which carries 
a broadfringe (fr>. Towards the base of the wing the convex posterior border terminates at 
a notch, internal to which is a short, almost bare and only slightly convex portion of edge, 
the alula (au), and internal to this a much more convex small lobe fringed with long hairs, 
which in the flexed position of the wing is sharply folded, the squama (sq). The terms here 
given to these two structures are as used by Edwards (1941) and as there has been in the 
literature some uncertainty as to which term applies to which a few words may be said on 
this point. 
The term squama was first used by Sharp (1899) and first applied to the mosquito by 
Nuttall and Shipley (1901). The latter authors state that in doing so they are following 
Sharp and give a reference to this author as 1895 (Cambridge Natural History). In vol. VI of 
this work Sharp (1899) gives a figure after Schneider where the single basal lobe in the wing of 
an acalypterate fly is named alula. Squama was a new name here given by Sharp to a lobe 
internal to this which he figures in the wing of Calliphora. This, as in the wing of the mos- 
quito, is characterised by a fringe of conspicuous hairs. 
The fringe in A. aegypti consists of a single row of long fusiform erect scales,fiinge scales, 
set along the dorsal surface of the wing edge, and in the intervals between these smaller 
shorter scales of the same type, secondary fringe scales, set along the ventral edge. In 
addition in the female, set along the edge external to these, one line ventral and one dorsal, 
-_ 
Figure 57. The wing. 
Wing of female showing venation and scaling. Nomenclature as in systematic works. 
a, humeral cross-vein; b, subcostal cross-vein; c, cross-vein l-2; d, supernumerary cross-vein; 
e, mid cross-vein ; f, posterior cross-vein. 
Wing of male on same scale. Nomenclature on generalised insect plan. 
Portion of fringe of female wing. a, fringe scale; b, secondary fringe scale; c, ventral basal 
scale; d, dorsal basal scale. 
The same of male wing. Ventral. 
Portion of subcosta showing broad scaling of both aspects. 
Portion of vein 2 showing scaling of ventral aspect. a, median squame scale; b, lateral 
squame scale; c, plume scale (showing through membrane). 
Portion of vein 3. Ventral aspect. Lettering as in 6. 
Base of wing showing remigium and other basal structures. 
Base of remigium more highly magnified. 
Lettering : An, anal vein; aa, alula; apx, apex of wing; art, articular sclerite ; C, costa; Cu, 
cubitus vein; cn, conoid; MI’, ulnoid; CYC, coracoid; epu, epaulet; fk, anterior forked cell; fk’, 
posterior forked cell; fr, wing fringe; inc, incrassation; M, media vein; MI, M,, MS, branches of 
M; m-cu, median cubital cross-vein; pwr, posterior wing root; R, radial vein; RI, R2, R3, R,, R,, 
branches of R ; Rg, remigium ; Rs, radial sector; r-m, radio-median cross-vein; SC, sub- 
costa; SC’, lobe at base of subcosta; sab, sabroid; SC, scutum; sep, subepaulet; sq, squama; 
tg, tegula. 
444 
I 1.0 mm. I 
V , @lmm. , 
. 
I @lmm. I 5 
.- _ o= -_ o” 0 0 0 
-0 _ 0 0 0. - 
.,\o 0 o- @ _ --oo - e’&. 
..’ 0 .- _ -L_ . -_-_ _/ 
\‘..- ,‘* 
xc / ---4 
, 005mm. , 9 
Figure 57 
445 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
is a single line of obliquely set small flat truncated scales (Fig. 57 (3) c, 6). These last are 
not present on the male wing (Fig. 57 (4)). The alula, like the posterior wing border, carries 
some small and inconspicuous fringe scales with a few fine hairs. The squama, on the 
contrary, has a line of conspicuous large hairs arising from small basal papillae. This 
description of the squama, however, applies only to that portion of the basal fold which in 
the flexed position of the wing forms an upwardly directed outer fold. Internal to this is 
a long length of ventrally directed fold with a peculiarly marked edge resembling some- 
what a coiled spring which may be distinguished as the axillary cord and will be referred 
to again later (Fig. 58 (4)). 
The wing venation (Fig. 57 (l), (2)). The venation of the wing in A. aegypti is of the usual 
Culicid type and only in small details differs from that in the great majority of mosquitoes. 
Compared with the venation in many Diptera the mosquito venation is of relatively simple 
character and whilst a notation following that of Comstock and Needham for the 
generalised insect wing was early put forward by Nuttall and Shipley and has with some 
minor modifications been accepted by later authors, see Edwards (1941), and still more 
recently by Natvig (1948), it is more usual in systematic works on the mosquito to employ 
a simpler notation in which the six main longitudinal veins are indicated by numbers in the 
order of occurrence of the veins from before backwards. The method of numbering is 
shown in Fig. 57 (1) and may be briefly indicated, leaving the question of the nomenclature 
of the veins in accordance with the generalised scheme to follow. 
The costa (C), forming the anterior edge of the wing, extends the whole length of the 
wing to the apex where it is continued into a thickening along its posterior border. The 
subcosta (SC) joins the costa a little external to its middle. Thefirst longitudinal vein (1) lies 
parallel to the costa and extends without break to the wing apex. The second longitudinal (2) 
begins about the middle of the wing where it is linked by a cross-vein to the first longi- 
tudinal. Towards the apex it branches into 2.1 and 2.2, forming what is commonly referred 
to as the anterior forked cell, the relative length of which to its stem may be of diagnostic 
importance in some groups. The stem is that portion of vein 2 which lies between its bifur- 
cation and the cross-vein linking it to vein 3 (cv. 2-3). In A. aegypti this ratio is about 2.5. 
Vein 4, though it extends from the base of the wing, in some respects resembles vein 2. 
At about the same level it bifurcates, forming the posterior forked cell. Between these two 
forks lies the short straight vein 3, linked at its inner end by cross-veins to veins 2 and 4, 
the general picture of two simple forked cells with a short vein 3 lying between these being 
almost diagnostic of the mosquito wing. Vein 5 also branches in a characteristic way, 
forming 5.1 and 5.2, and behind this is the unbranched vein 6 joining the wing edge at 
about its middle and marking off posteriorly and basally a portion of wing sometimes 
referred to as the anal area. 
Besides the true veins which are scaled there are certain thickenings which are not scaled 
and have not the appearance of true veins. Three such are noted in the wing of Anopheles 
by Prashad, namely a medialfold along the upper edge of vein 5, a cubitalfold between 5 and 
6 and an anal foZd posterior to 6. The last two and traces of the first can usually be seen in 
the wing of Agdes aegypti, especially if stained. The thickening behind 5 is the most con- 
spicuous and runs close behind vein 5 and its posterior branch 5.2 (Fig. 57 (I), (8) inc). 
Of some importance too are the cross-veins. These are best shown in the dry wing suitably 
flattened or in the scale-denuded stained mounted wing. In the canada balsam mounted 
446 
. 
THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
wing unstained they are only with difficulty made out. In the mosquito wing these are six 
in number, namely the humeral (Fig. 57 (1) a) near the base of the wing and linking the 
costa with the subcosta; the subcostal (b) linking the subcosta about its middle to vein 1; 
the cross-vein linking vein 2 at its base to vein 1; and cross-veins CL 2-3, cv. 3-4 and 
cv. 4-5. The last three mentioned are much the most conspicuous of the cross-veins and 
their relative positions have been given some systematic importance. They are respectively 
the supernumerary, the mid and the posterior cross-veins. 
The subcostal cross-vein is not easily visible since it is liable to be concealed by the 
relative positions of the subcosta and vein 1 and is often not very conspicuously marked. 
Yet, though holding no recognised position in the generalised scheme as at present applied, 
it is always present and in the developing wing is the largest of all the cross-veins (see 
Christophers and Barraud, 1924). 
Application of the generalised scheme of wing venation to that of the mosquito. In the 
generalised plan of insect wing venation there is recognised, in addition to the costa and 
subcosta and a variable number of anal veins, the following three veins and their branches, 
namely the radius (R), the media (M) and the cubitus (Cu). The radius is regarded as having 
one branch, RI, which takes off anterior to the main vein, and a branch, radial-sector, (R,), 
which takes off posteriorly and terminates typically by dividing dichotomously into R2+3 
and R,+, and finally into the four branches, R,, R,, R, and R, . The media similarly, after 
giving off an anterior branch dividing into MA1 and MA,, divides into M1+2 and M3+4, 
with A&-M, if there is further division. The cubitus divides into Cul and Cuz. There may 
be anal veins, An,, An2, etc. This notation as it has been applied to the mosquito wing, 
following Edwards (1941) and Natvig (1948), is shown in Fig. 57 (2). 
It will be observed that only three of the six cross-veins actually present appear in the 
generalised scheme, namely the humeral cross-vein, cv. R-M and cv. M-Cu. The others are 
considered (except cv. SC-R which is not included) merely as cross-veins developed near 
where the veins take origin, their original connection being lost. 
The generalised scheme is based on development, and especially early tracheation, of the 
wing in primitive insects. Its application to the mosquito from such a point of view has 
been dealt with by Christophers and Barraud (1924), who have studied developmental 
changes and tracheation as seen in the wing in the larva and pupa. In the mature larva the 
wing is a thick flap-shaped organ in which the course of the forming veins and the trachea- 
tion accompanying these is clearly traceable (Fig. 59 (1)). The whole wing at this stage is 
surrounded by a cord-like thickening with a channel similar to those which will eventually 
become veins and which links up the terminations of veins where these reach the wing 
periphery. On the wing field are tracts indicating the formation of the future veins and 
cross-veins. The arrangement differs from that in the imaginal wing in that in the place of 
longitudinal veins linked by narrow cross-veins there is a broad arc from which the 
terminal portions of the future veins pass to the marginal channel. The anterior portion of 
this arc clearly represents the future radius and from it there pass to the marginal channel 
vein 1 (the portion beyond the cross-vein area), vein 2 (as represented by the fork) and 
vein 3. The posterior portion of the arc forms a broad hand-shaped area occupying the 
hinder basal half of the wing (Fig. 59 (3) b). From it strands of future vein tissue pass to 
the marginal channel representing vein 4 (the fork), vein 5 with its bifurcation and vein 6, 
also two shorter arms basal to this. The condition therefore represents very clearly the 
447 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
generalised plan and shows that the cross-veins are not secondary structures but the 
shrunken remains of the original broad arc. 
Evidence from the tracheation is less straightforward. The tracheal leashes in the wing in 
the larva consist of an anterior bundle of fine tracheae in the subcostal area (a.tr) and one 
in the cubito-anal area (b.tr). The first of these gives a branch to the costa, but this fails to 
reach even as far as the subcostal junction. The branch to the subcosta, however, extends to 
the margin of the wing apex. Other branches pass through the wide CL-SC cross-vein area 
to veins 1 and 2. The cubito-anal leash sends branches to veins 4,5 and 6, but also may send 
others, crossing branches from the subcostal leash, to veins 2 or 3. This last feature is not so 
remarkable as might at first sight appear since the wing at this stage is bag-like with the 
dorsal and ventral surfaces widely separated. There is even some indication that tracheal 
leashes may be dorsal or ventral in nature. Thus the subcostal leash is rather ventral and 
tends to supply the ventral surface, whilst the cubito-anal is dorsal. The most striking 
feature in later development is the formation in the pupa of a new tracheal branch from 
the thorax from which there develops an entirely new leash, the radial. Representation of 
the media seems doubtful. 
The wing scaling (Fig. 57 (5), (6), (7)). The wing scaling in A. aegypti shows few charac- 
teristics other than those commonly present in many species of mosquito. All the longi- 
tudinal veins are scaled. In this respect two types of vein occur which have relation to some 
degree of plication of the wing, namely convex or direct veins which run along the crests of 
folds directed dorsally and concave or reverse veins having an opposite relationship. On 
the upper surface of direct veins and the lower surface of reverse veins the scaling consists of 
flat, usually rather broad and abruptly truncated overlapping scales, squame scales. In 
most mosquitoes these are typically of two kinds, namely those arranged longitudinally on 
the vein, median squames, usually short and overlapping, and those projecting laterally over 
the membrane, lateral squames, which are longer but still lie relatively flat. On the lower 
surface of direct veins and upper surface of reverse veins the scales are longer, narrower and 
more pointed and project away from the vein, plume scales. The direct veins in mosquitoes 
are: the costa (up to the subcostal junction) and veins 1, 3, 5 and 6. Veins 2 and 4 are 
reverse veins. The subcosta in position appears as a reverse vein, but the scaling, in 
A. aegypti more resembles that of a direct vein. Usually the scaling tends to become 
narrower and longer and the distinction of forms less marked towards the apex. 
The scaling in A. aegypti is rather narrow and without any outstanding specific characters. 
The median squame scales over most of the wing have about 6-9 striations, reaching about 
10 towards the front of the wing. Plume scales have about 3-6 striations. Squame scales 
measure in the female 80-100,~ in length and the plume scales 150,~~ or more. Some of the 
veins tend to show particular characters. Thus the subcosta has broad short scales on both 
aspects (Fig. 57 (5)) and vein 1 has the lateral squames well developed (Fig. 57 (6) b) which 
are not very marked on many veins in the species. The scales are uniformly dark show- 
ing no wing ornamentation except for a minute white spot at the extreme base of the 
costa. 
Scaling in the male is on the same plan, but much less profuse and the scales are smaller, 
the squame cells having at most about eight striations and measuring about 60~ in length, 
whilst plume scales do not much exceed three striations and measure only up to about 
100,~~ The pale spot at the base of the costa is also present in the male. 
448 
THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
The wing base (Figs. 57 (8) ; 58). Apart from the neuration of the wing as seen in the 
distal portions of this organ and already described, there are important structures at the 
base of the wing still requiring notice. Structurally the wing consists of two somewhat 
independent parts, an anterior more rigid costo-radial portion and a posterior more labile 
cubito-anal region. Movements of the former are largely controlled by those basal parts 
forming what may be termed the anterior wing root. The latter is intimately connected with 
a complex line of membranous wing and thickenings forming the posterior wing root. The 
, @lmm. , 4 
Figure 58. The wing root. 
Showing pleural attachment of the wing. The thicker lines show the line of ventral attachment in 
a plane nearer to the observer than the thinner line of dorsal attachment. a, hamuloid process ; 
b, unguoid process; c, point at which the axillary cord becomes the free wing edge. 
Showing basal sclerites. Lettering as in 1. 
The same preparation as 2 drawn apart. 
Membranous posterior wing root as drawn out on the flat. 
The same in natural position. 
Lettering; aa, alula; axe, axillary cord; bas, basalare; ch, thickening towards edge of axillary 
cord portion; ch’, thickening at extreme base of fold; Cn, conoid; Cn’, ulnoid; UC, coracoid; 
dn, dens ; epu, epaulet ; ~7, flange of scutum ; me, mesepimeron ; pa, prealar knob; pwr, posterior 
wing root ; sa, subalar ; SC, scutum ; set, scutellum ; sq, squama ; tg, tegula ; un, unguiculus ; W, area 
occupied by wing attachment. 
latter term is applied by Prashad to the line of thickening formed by the basal junction of 
veins 4, 5 and 6, but is here used also in a wider sense to include other structures in this 
region. 
Although the costa is seemingly the most rigid vein in the wing it plays little part in giving 
basal support to this organ, since at the base of the wing it is neither continued into, nor 
29 449 CH 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
articulates with, any further basal structure, but ends in membrane close to, though not in 
contact with, the small sclerite named by Prashad the subepaulet and which appears to be 
the humeral plate of Snodgrass (Fig. 57 (8) sep). Nevertheless, though there is no actual 
articulation in this position, the subepaulet is hollowed where it faces the end of the costa 
and may act as a check to this structure during extreme extension of the wing. Thus the 
costa is largely free basally so far as rotation or movements within certain limits are con- 
cerned. The anterior wing root, which forms as it were a handle by which the movements of 
the fore part of the wing are brought about, is constituted by a conspicuous thickening of 
the wing lying posterior to the costa and termed the remigium (Fig. 57 (8) Rg). 
The remigium is essentially a strengthened portion of wing. It appears in dorsal view as 
a double structure consisting of two bar-like thickenings, an anterior and a posterior, the 
general effect being not unlike a long brooch, the posterior thickening forming the pin. 
Actually it is a bent-up area of wing convex dorsally and deeply hollowed ventrally. It has, 
therefore, an upper and under surface. The two bar-like thickenings are the thickened edges 
of this hollow. The space between the thickenings is the roof of the hollow. Along the dorsal 
surface of the anterior bar, besides scales, which on its basal portion form a marked cluster, 
there are a number of circular sensory pits. These form a cluster basally and a line of pits 
more distally (Fig. 57 (8), (9)). The posterior bar is chiefly noticeable as having on its inner 
aspect, that is facing the hollow, about its middle third, a row of rounded ridges, which, 
depending how they are viewed, appear as rounded teeth or parallel grooves. It was the 
peculiar appearance of these regular ridges that led Shipley and Wilson, who very tho- 
roughly investigated these parts in Anopheles, to consider that they might form a stridu- 
lating organ. In Agdes aegypti there are some fifteen or so of these rounded ridges confined 
to the posterior bar. Sometimes in viewing the parts it may appear that there are ridges on 
the anterior bar. But critical examination has always negatived this and there appear to be 
no ridges in opposition. It is doubtful what their function is, but Prashad considers that 
they prevent sliding of the parts upon each other in a longitudinal direction during rotation 
of the wing. 
The appearance of the remigium suggests that its bars represent two wing veins, possibly 
the subcosta and first longitudinal. At its distal end the remigium is joined by both these 
veins, but the subcosta, after passing close alongside the anterior bar, leaves this to end in 
a small thickening on the ventral aspect of the wing just below the inner end of the costa 
(Fig. 57 (8) SC’). 
Closely associated with the remigium are two further thickenings, namely one running 
parallel to the remigium a little posterior to it and a small sclerite linking this to the 
remigium, respectively the sabroid (sab) and the articular (art) of Prashad. 
The term posterior wing root has been applied by Prashad to the line of thickening which 
results at the base of the wing from the linked up bases of veins 4, 5 and 6. This thickening, 
which resembles a vein without scales, passes to the wing border at the junction of the alula 
and squama (Fig. 57 (8)pwr). 
Functionally the posterior wing root is formed by a long line of membranous wing 
formed from within outwards by the alula, squama and a region internal to the squama 
bounded on its external margin by a curious cord-like structure having somewhat the 
appearance of a length of spiral spring, the axillary cord (Fig. 58 (4) ax.c). The margins of 
these three portions are characterised respectively by small fringe scales (alula), long hairs 
with conspicuous bases (squama) and a long length of axillary cord. When stretched out 
450 
THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
this basal membranous area is surprisingly long (Fig. 58 (4)). But even when the wing is 
extended it is thrown into folds which are rigidly and exactly maintained by thickenings in 
the fold to be mentioned shortly. The alula is not affected, but the squama, defining this 
part as above, forms a flat, upwardly directed fold and internal to this is a deep ventral fold 
formed by the portion margined by the axillary cord (Fig. 58 (5)). The thickenings in the 
area in Anopheles have been termed by Prashad from within outwards, the intermediary, 
the conoid and the ulnoid. In Aedes aegypti the conoid (cn) is very conspicuous owing to 
its almost black coloration, usually an indication that the part is dense and elastic. External 
to the conoid is a line of thickening (cn’) which corresponds fairly well to Prashad’s descrip- 
tion of the ulnoid. This forms a line from just external to the conoid to the wing margin 
near the junction of the alula and squama. There is a further line of thickening internal to 
the conoid which demarcates the inner edge of the folded squama and also a long line of 
thickening lying just internal to the axillary cord which serves to maintain the downward 
projecting bulge of membrane internal to this. There is also a rather plate-like thickening 
which arises near the posterior end of the subalar plate and further gives rigidity to the fold 
(Fig. 58 (3), (4) ch, ch’). There can be little doubt but that these different thickenings act 
as an elastic control drawing this membranous portion of wing into precisely determined 
folds when the wing is flexed and even assisting in the complete flexion of the wing. 
The basal sclerites (Fig. 58 (l), (2), (3)). The wing is articulated with the thorax largely 
through a complex of small basal sclerites (pterales of Snodgrass) which very much call to 
mind the carpal bones of the human wrist. They have been described and individually 
named in Anopheles by Prashad and whilst some may be homologised with the axillary 
sclerites of the generalised insect wing there are others which are not readily so homo- 
logised and for which the names as given by Prashad must provisionally be used. 
The most readily identified and largest of these sclerites lies at the base of the remigium 
with which structure it is largely continuous, namely a dark flattish shield-shaped hairy 
plate, which from its position and relations is the epaulet (Figs. 57, 58 epu), and possibly 
the second axillary of the generalised insect plan. Fused with the anterior border of the 
epaulet is a small sclerite which is hollowed facing the end of the costa and can be identified 
as the subepaulet (sep), and probably the humeralplate of Snodgrass. Situated where the 
inner margin of the epaulet bends deeply down against the thorax and articulates with the 
flange-like extension of the scutum described later is the dens, possibly thejirst axillary of 
the generalised plan. Though the dark hairy surface of the epaulet ceases at the apparent 
inner margin of this sclerite its substance is more deeply continued as a snout-like 
process, the coracoid of Prashad (crc). This process lies between the diverging fang-like 
arms of a large sclerite which has in certain positions a remarkable resemblance to an 
inverted molar tooth, the unguiculus, probably the third axillary. Whilst the main articu- 
lation of the dens is with the scutal flange, that of the unguiculus is with the hamuloid 
process of the mesepimeron, which as described later with the unguoid process of the meso- 
sternum forms the pleural wing process or main ventral articulation point of the wing with 
the pleura. Whilst the head of the unguiculus articulates as described, its two fang-like 
processes pass dorsally, the more external continuing under and fusing with the posterior 
border of the epaulet. The irregular shape of these sclerites and their complicated articu- 
lations make it difficult to follow or describe them in detail, but much information will be 
found in the paper by Prashad. It is clear, however, that in essence they are thickenings of 
4s 29-2 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
the upper and lower 
likely to be revealed cuticular surface 
by tracing their of the wing and their complete 
formation in the pupa. rela tionships are most 
The pleural attachments of the wing (Fig. 58 (I), (2), (3)). The wing takes origin from the 
thorax at the meeting place of a number of thoracic sclerites, namely dorsally the scutum 
towards it posterior end, anteriorly the upper portion of the sternopleuron in the region 
of the pre-alar knob, ventrally the mes-epimeron, and posteriorly, through the axillary cord, 
the scutellum (Fig. 58 (1)). 
The most conspicuous feature dorsally is the broad smoothflartge (fl) projecting down- 
wards almost vertically from the margin of the scutum. This flange is devoid of hairs or 
scales and is normally hidden under overhanging chaetae arising from the scutal pro- 
minence lying over the wing root. Its lower border articulates with the bent down inner 
end of the wing base forming the main dorsal articulation of the wing. Ventrally the main 
feature is the upwardly projecting pleural wing process. This is formed anteriorly by a 
somewhat claw-like process from the parts in the region of the pre-alar knob, the unguoid 
process (b) and posteriorly by the hamuloid process (a). The hamuloid process is a pro- 
jection from the upper anterior edge of the mes-epimeron. It is a very characteristic structure 
in appearance and useful in working out relationships of the basal sclerites. Lying in the 
membrane posterior to the two conjoined processes is an isolated crescentic sclerite 
situated above the upper edge of the mes-epimeron, but separated from this by a narrow 
membranous gap. This is one of the accessory sclerites, epipleurites or paraptera and being 
situated posterior to the pleural wing process can be identified as the subalar of Snodgrass 
(sa). What may be the basalare epipleurite is an isolated sclerite situated anterior to the 
unguoid process and a little dorsal to the pre-alar knob. It is shaped rather like a limpet 
shell and faces rather inwards (bus). A little posterior to it at the edge of the tergite and 
near the subepaulet is a curious little hair lobe, the tegula (tg). 
Briefly the wing root dorsally, through the dens, is articulated with the downwardly 
projecting scutal flange representing the notal wing processes of the generalised insect plan, 
and incidentally forming a deep gutter-like depression between the wing base and the thorax. 
Ventrally the wing articulates with the upwardly projecting strong pleural wing process 
reaching to about the level of the scutal flange, but at some distance external to this. The 
result when the wing is extended is a lever system with what may be regarded as the fulcrum 
at the pleural process and the force operating at the end of the short arm of the lever at 
the scutal flange, the power being provided by the indirect wing muscles dragging down- 
wards the scutum. This, however, is by no means the whole story of the wing mechanism 
which will be further dealt with in the chapter on flight. 
THE HALTERES 
The halteres of Diptera represent the hinder wings of other insect orders adapted as sense 
organs concerned with co-ordination in flight (see Pringle, 1948, and chapter XXIII on 
flight). In general structure the halteres of mosquitoes resemble those of other Diptera. 
They consist of a knob-like head, capitellum (Fig. 59 (3) cap), a narrow stalk or neck, 
scape orpedicel (sea) and a dilated basal portion, scabellum (scb). They are articulated along 
the line of junction of the metathoracic pleuron and the lateral portion of the metanotum 
a little posterior to the metathoracic spiracle by a hinge-like joint allowing movement 
in a dorso-ventral elliptical curve. The sensory structures they carry consist of areas of 
452 
THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
sensilla arranged in rows, namely one dorsally at the base of the scape, dorsal scapalplate 
(Scala superior) (scs), one situated dorsally proximal to this, the basalplate (cupola) (cup) and 
one on the ventral surface opposite to the dorsal scapal plate, ventral scapafi plate (Scala 
inferior) (Fig. 80 (4)). The names in brackets are those employed by Prashad (1916) 
adopting Lowne’s nomenclature, those not so enclosed are more recent terms used by 
Pringle in his description of the halteres of CaZZiphora. The dorsal and ventral scapal plates 
consist of rhomboidal sensilla, the basal plate of circular sensilla. For further information 
on these structures see section given later on sense organs. In addition to these, Pringle in 
CaZZ$hora records two further areas of sensilla of smaller size, one situated on the dorsal 
surface close to the basal plate on its anterior side, dorsal Hick’spapillae, and a still smaller 
group on the ventral surface of the scabellum, ventral Hick’s papillae. There is also a 
simple large papilla just anterior to the distal portion of the dorsal scapal plate, undif- 
ferentiatedpapilla. Contained in the haltere but not appearing externally is probably a 
large and a small chordotonal organ (see under ‘Special sense organs’, p. 663). 
In the mosquito the halteres have been described by Prashad (1916) in Ochlerotatus 
pseudotaeniatus Giles (Agdes (Finlaya) pseudotaeniatus Giles) ; see also Nuttall and Shipley 
(1903) ; Shipley and Wilson (1902) ; Shipley (19 15) ; who give a brief description of these 
organs in Anopheles maculipennis. 
In Ai;des aegypti the halteres of a number of specimens of normal size gave as mean 
length for the female 0.37 mm., with range 0.34-0.4 mm. In the male the mean was O-3 mm. 
with range 0.29-033. This compares very well with a length of O-4 mm. given by Nuttall 
and Shipley for the rather large species of Anopheles, A. maculipennis, and O-56-0*6 mm. for 
the rather large Culicid studied by Prashad. It is also not very different in proportion to 
the halteres in Tipula. As given in the figure of natural size given by Pringle these measure 
about 3.0 mm. to a wing length of about 28.0 mm., a ratio to wing length of about one- 
ninth (O-107). For Ai;des aegypti the mean wing length has been previously given as 
3.4 mm. (see under ‘Body shape and Proportions’, p. 408), which, taking the figure for the 
halteres given above, would give an index of 0.109. As pointed out by Prashad the halteres 
of the mosquito are relatively large as compared with those of the higher Diptera, the length 
of the haltere for CaZZiphora as given by Pringle being only O-7 mm. 
In shape the halteres of Ak;des aegypti are broad and stumpy as compared with the more 
slender and elongate organs of CaZZiphora and Tipula, but closely resemble in shape those 
of other mosquitoes so far as these have been figured. The capitellum is nearly half the 
total length of the haltere (2.0-2.5 mm.). It is globose and bulged posteriorly with a slight 
kink in this direction towards its junction with the scape. The scape is short and stout, 
forming about one-third of the length of the haltere. It consists of a thickened and smooth 
anterior border passing from the capitellum to the scabellum the distal portion of which, 
like the capitellum, carries scales, those on the capitellum being light coloured, those on 
the scape darker. Behind the thickened anterior border is a soft membranous portion 
with a dorsal and a ventral flattish surface and a rather narrow membranous edge. Dorsally 
this carries the area of sensilla forming the dorsal scapal plate and ventrally the somewhat 
narrow bulged area on which is situated the ventral scapal plate. On the posterior border 
are two rather flat papillae (ps). The scabellum consists of a smooth sclerotised portion 
at the base of the scape which, forming a rounded angle, is continued along the base of 
the haltere to form the free distal portion of the hinge-like joint by which the organ is 
articulated. In the angle between these two portions is a membranous area forming a rather 
453 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
complex system of lobes. Proximal to the dorsal scapal plate the area is depressed, forming 
a hollow in which is situated the basal lobe. If structures corresponding to the two Hicks 
papillae are present in AL;des aegypti, they are quite inconspicuous and their presence still 
requires confirmation. 
The whole haltere is hinged approximately horizontally, but not in the direct line of the 
body and diverging from this obliquely in a forward direction at an angle of a little under 
30”. The hinge does not extend for the whole length of the scabellum leaving a portion at 
the anterior angle to project freely without attachment. To this projecting angle and the 
oblique hinge line the thick anterior edge appears to be external whether the haltere is 
raised to the vertical or flexed, an effect that is at first rather puzzling. The general effect of 
the haltere as a moving structure can be likened to a short length of rod with a swollen 
knob at its free end and the other end bent at an angle a little less than a right angle, this 
bent portion rotating on its axis as a hinge (Fig. 59 (2) a-b). Movement of the haltere is 
mainly in an up and down direction through 180” in a plane approximately at 60” to the 
median vertical plane of the body. It cuts this latter at a vertical line passing through the 
middle point of the postnotum. Further information about movements are given in 
chapter XXIII in connection with flight. 
(e) THE ABDOMEN 
Apart from the terminal segments forming the terminalia the abdomen, in the male, 
consists of seven normally developed segments and an eighth segment more or less normal 
in character but rotated following emergence through 180”. In the female the eighth 
segment is much reduced in size and largely retracted within the seventh. 
Each unmodified segment consists of tergite, sternite and membranous pleurae. Both 
tergites and sternites, with the exception of sternite I which is largely membranous, 
consist of roughly quadrangular plates with no special thickenings or division into parts. 
Normally both tergites and sternites overlap for a short distance and no intersegmental 
membrane is visible, but in the gorged abdomen the plates become widely separated with 
a considerable extent of membrane showing. Both tergites and sternites are uniformly 
covered with scales giving rise to the ornamentation already described (see Figs. 48 and 59). 
The scales are fairly broad flat scales with up to about ten striations, except those forming 
the silvery spots which are as previously described. Apart from a line or so of incon- 
spicuous hairs largely confined to the posterior and lateral borders and especially notice- 
Figure 59. Larval wing, halteres and abdomen. 
1 Larval wing rudiment (after Christophers and Barraud). 
2 Metanotum and halteres, showing hinge line a-b. 
3 Haltere. A, dorsal view of left haltere of female; B, portion of Scala superior more highly 
magnified; c, optical section of B; D, portion of cupola more highly magnified. 
4 Female abdomen. A. as seen in dorsal view in ungorged female; B, dorsal view of tergites as 
seen in gorged female ; c, as in B but showing sternites; a, lateral silvery spot on tergite I; 
b, basal white band; c, silvery spot on sides of tergite and sternite; d, apical pale band. 
Lettering : An, anal vein; C, costa ; Cu, cubitus vein; cap, capitellum ; cup, cupola; cv’, area of 
cross-veins; M, media vein; mt, metanotum; ps, posterior papillae; ptn, postnotum; R, radius; 
SC, subcosta; sea, scape; scb, scabellum; SCS, Scala superior; I-VIII, abdominal segments. 
454 
cd c 
2 
VIII B 1 
% 
E: 1 
4 
Figure 59 
455 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
able on the stemites, there are no special setae, but segments VI and VII carry numerous 
hairs among the scales. 
The pleurae consist of membrane only and are entirely devoid of scales and hairs. As is 
commonly the case with membranes, for example the neck, the wing membrane, etc., they 
are closely covered with microtrichae, which in this case are arranged in groups of three or 
four. Whilst, especially in the female, the pleurae form a considerable extent of membrane 
I they are normally but little evident, the edges of the sternites, except when the abdomen is 
greatly distended as in the gorged insect, being inserted under the tergite carrying with them 
the pleural membrane. This is not folded or elastically collapsed, but is spread out and flat 
under the tergite, as can be seen by lifting the sides of the tergite with a needle in an unfed 
female. When the abdomen is fully expanded, as after a blood meal, the full extent of the 
pleura in the middle segments of the abdomen may be as great as that of the tergite and 
sternite, but it is doubtful if it is stretched rather than merely fully opened out. On the 
membrane of each of segments I-VII, towards the anterior end of the segment and near 
the upper margin of the pleura, there is a spiracular opening. No spiracles are present in 
either sex on segment VIII. The last spiracle normal to insects as a class is on segment VIII, 
but in imaginal Diptera, seemingly as a result of premature development in the larva, the 
last spiracle-bearing segment is VII. 
Segment I differs in some respects from the succeeding segments. The tergite is only about 
half the length of the more anterior segments and, in addition to scales, is uniformly set with 
hairs. Laterally it carries a particularly conspicuous silvery white scale patch and is here 
extended in a somewhat lobose manner ventrally. The sternal area is largely membranous 
with only a narrow strip of sternite carrying scales posteriorly; or, in the male, it may be 
entirely membranous and devoid of scales. 
In the female the seventh segment has only a narrow line of pleurae and in the distended 
abdomen remains relatively undistended, forming a cuff-like end to the abdomen, within 
which is the almost wholly invaginated small reduced eighth segment. The eighth segment 
in the female is rather smooth with some fine hairs but devoid of scales. Proximally it is 
joined to segment VII with a considerable extent of intersegmental membrane. At its 
terminal end are the flap-like cerci and median subgenital plate of the female hypopygium. 
In the middle line posteriorly it is deeply indented, the edges of the sternite forming semi- 
circular hairy lobes on each side of the median fissure. 
In the male the eighth segment is normal in size, but after emergence is gradually rotated 
through 180” so that the sternite and claspers become dorsal. It is somewhat expanded 
apically to accommodate the large claspers. During life the segment with the claspers is 
commonly held raised in a characteristic manner (Fig. 49 (2)). 
Abdominal segments distal to the eighth in both sexes are modified to form the 
terminalia. 
(fl THE MALE TERMINALIA 
The modified terminal segments of the insect abdomen are commonly referred to as the 
male and female genitalia, or male and female hypopygium respectively. But many 
authors prefer the name terminalia as more correctly designating the complex to which the 
term refers. 
The parts show a great variety of structure in the different insect orders and no adequate 
456 
THE MALE TERMINALIA 
general account appears to exist. For the general plan in Nematocera may be specially 
mentioned the work of Crampton (1942), on the parts in Diptera including the primitive 
form Panorpa, and that of Abul-Nasr (1950), describing the structure and development of 
the parts in three families of Nematocera. 
On the male terminalia of mosquitoes there is a large literature, including among papers 
dealing with structure and terminology the following : Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12, 
figures of American species) ; Edwards (1920, 1941, structure and terminology); Christo- 
phers (1922, development) ; Christophers and Barraud (1923, terminology) ; Root (1923, 
1924, structure) ; Freeborn (1924, an important contribution on structure, more especially 
of the anopheline terminalia); Martini (1922, 1928, structure and terminology); Matheson 
(1929, technique) ; Barraud (1934, terminology and figures of culicine species with named 
parts); Marshall (1938, British species); Natvig (1948, an historical summary and account 
with many figures of Fenno-Scandian species); Marks (1949, on the Ak’des scutellaris 
group and information on the basal lobe in Agdes). 
On the parts in A. aegypti are more especially the descriptions and figures given by 
Edwards (1941) and Barraud (1934). See also Iyengar and Menon (1955), and references 
given by these authors. 
TERMINOLOGY 
The nomenclature of the parts now generally adopted is mainly that of Edwards and 
may be gathered from the figure given by Edwards (1941), on p. 15 of his monograph on 
Ethiopian mosquitoes. A useful list of terms with corresponding lettered figures is also 
given by Barraud (1934), p. 4. With one or two exceptions the nomenclature of Edwards is 
that here used. 
Where the segmental nature of the parts is clear, these are named accordingly. This 
applies to the tergite and sternite of the ninth abdominal segment, the homologies of which 
are not in doubt. It is also now generally accepted that the side-pieces, claspers, forcipes 
of the older literature are appendages of this segment and the similarity to the coxae of 
the limbs justifies the name coxite which has been applied to them. Possibly the term 
gonocoxite recently in use for the parts in other Nematocera would be even better as also 
indicating their genitalic character. * The terminal blade-like structure at their apex is the 
style and the small terminal segment would seem most simply termed the appendage of the 
style. Such a term would still be suitable where, as in some cases, the appendage is large 
and complicated. The appendage is given by Edwards as the articulated spine of the style, 
but this name is not repeated in Barraud’s list. 
From analogy with the parts in more primitive insects the median lobe bearing the anus 
would appear to be homologous with the cercus-bearing complex of the tenth tergite and 
eleventh sternite of many forms and is now generally referred to as theproctiger, its lateral 
plates being the paraprocts. The plates on its dorsal aspect appear to be, and are named by 
Edwards, the tenth tergite; or alternatively the dorsal plates of the proctiger or epiprocts, 
as also used by this author. 
In regard to structures of non-segmental nature the homologies are still somewhat 
uncertain. According to Abul-Nasr the terminal portion of the male genital duct in Nema- 
tocera is formed from a later and separate invagination than that forming the ejaculatory 
ducts and the portion of duct so formed he terms the penis tube. The penis tube may, as in 
* The coxite (gonocoxite) is also commonly termed the basistyle, the terminal piece being the dististyle. 
457 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
Chironomus, merely open directly on the inter-segmental membrane, or it may with its 
surrounding tissues be excavated to form a projecting intromittent organ carrying the tube. 
Or the intromittent organ may be otherwise formed by outgrowths at the inner base of the 
gonocoxites, the paramere lobes of Pruthi (1924). These lobes may divide, the inner pair 
uniting to form the intromittent organ, while the outer pair become the parameres. Or the 
paramere lobes may not divide but remain as single prominences (paramerophores of 
Abul-Nasr). 
In the first case, where the intromittent organ is formed from sclerotisations of the inter- 
segmental membrane it may, following Abul-Nasr, be termed theta, a term used by 
Wesche. It is also termed penis sheath by Abul-Nasr. When the intromittent organ is 
formed as a result of excavation, as is the filamentous organ in Tipulidae, it may be termed, 
following Abul-Nasr, penis (penis tube and surrounding tissue). Where formed from the 
inner parameral lobes it would, following Pruthi, be aedeagus. An advantage of a termino- 
logy based on correct homology is that there may be present more than one organ con- 
cerned with intromission, for example in the Tipulidae where, besides the coiled fila- 
mentous penis, there may be a sclerotised organ, penis sheath or theta, formed by inter- 
segmental membrane. Or a penis may be present associated with an aedeagus. 
The name now most usually applied to the intromittent organ in the mosquito is 
phallosome, though aedeagus is sometimes used. The name aedeagus was originally applied 
to the intromittent organ in Coleoptera. How far it is applicable to the mosquito is un- 
certain. Edwards uses phallosome for the median organ and aedeagus for the whole 
complex including the parameres. Though appearing in potash specimens as projections 
the parameres are actually sclerotisations of the sides of the depression in which the 
phallosome lies, that is the genital cavity or penis sac of Abul-Nasr. Until more is known of 
the details of development in the mosquito it would seem best at present to retain the termes 
phallosome and parameres as now in common use. 
A characteristic of the mosquito terminalia in the male is that, as first pointed out by 
Christophers (1922), all the parts are rotated through 180”. This rotation involves seg- 
ment VIII. It takes place subsequent to emergence, shortly after which the parts may be 
found unrotated or in an intermediate position. To avoid confusion any reference in what 
follows will be to the morphological position, that is, to the parts as they were before 
rotation. 
THE MALE TERMINALIA OF A,!?DE,S AEGYPTI 
The male terminalia of A. aegypti conform in general to the description given above when 
discussing the nomenclature of parts. As in other mosquitoes the parts including seg- 
ment VIII are rotated. Unlike the condition in the female, segment VIII in the male is not 
unduly small or telescoped within segment VII. Though rotated with the other parts it is 
not otherwise modified and it retains the scale characters of its respective surfaces. 
Tergite IX is peculiar in having two densely sclerotised conical processes divided by a deep 
median emargination (Fig. 60 (1) IXt). Laterally the tergite narrows abruptly to stout rib- 
like bars that extend ventrally to meet the sternite. A peculiar feature is the termination of 
these arms in flat triangular expansions which end largely in membrane but articulate by 
one corner with the narrow sclerotised portion of the ninth sternite (Fig. 60 (2) a). Similar 
triangular expansions are referred to by Martini (1928) and are figured by Natvig in 
A. communis (see Fig. 12 of his monograph). Sternite IX is peculiar. Anteriorly it consists 
THE MALE TERMINALIA 
of a narrow crescent-shaped sclerotised plate (Fig. 60 (2) KY”) which appears to be 
apodematous and gives rise along its length to muscular bands (muscle no. 4 of the series 
given later). This portion posteriorly merges gradually into the extensive area of membrane 
that covers the parts ventrally proximal to the bases of the gonocoxites ((2) IQ’). In some 
cases this membrane is slightly thicker and gives the appearance of a thin sclerite. If 
sternite, it would also account for the apparent lack of relation of the expanded terminal 
portion of the tergite arms since these would then, if the membrane were sternite, show a 
normal relation to this. 
The gonocoxites are rather stumpy and so shaped and aligned that their inner margins 
at their bases approach each other ventrally, whilst their outer and dorsal margins are 
. widely separated. Their ventral surface ((2) Gc”) is uniformly sclerotised and carries hairs 
and scales. Along their basal edge is a line of thickening beyond which there is a narrow 
zone of sclerotised membrane. There is no similar line of thickening on the dorsal surface. 
The dorsal surface is largely membranous ((1) Gc’). About one-third of the surface 
externally only is sclerotised, and like the ventral surface, with which it is continuous over the 
outer aspect of the gonocoxite, carries hairs ((1) Gc). It is this narrow sclerotised area 
which is continued as the basal apodeme. Set in the membranous portion towards the 
apex of the gonocoxite is a conspicuous spinose plate, the basal lobe ((1) bl). 
The basal lobe, though situated in A. aegypti more apically than basally, seems clearly 
homologous with a similar structure which in many species of AL;des is basal in position 
and in other at various levels. It is a strongly sclerotised plate carrying stout spinose hairs 
arising from sockets. Along the inner edge of the plate is a row of specially stout hairs 
with extra large sockets some of which have characteristic flat blade-like angled tips 
(Fig. 61 (1) a; (3)). Iyengar and Menon (1955), who first drew attention to these specialised 
hairs in A. aegypti, give the number of such hairs in the material studied by them as 3-4. 
But in the material at my disposal there seem very regularly to be just two such hairs 
showing the full characters, though some of the other large hairs are sometimes somewhat 
bent. At the base of the large hairs the sockets are 7-10,~ in diameter and it is possible 
the hairs are sensory in nature. Proximally the basal lobes are continued into smooth folds 
with regularly arranged small hairs that give them a characteristic appearance. On each of 
these folds are two medium-sized hairs with sockets which may possibly represent the 
harpago of many species (Fig. 61 (1) b). The folds on each side pass to the gap between the 
gonocoxites where they are connected by a rectangular-shaped thickening of the membrane 
(Fig. 61 (1) c). The two basal lobes with the folds into which they are continued and the 
membrane linking them across the median line are readily detached in dissection as a single 
structure which would appear to represent the harpagonal fold of many species. 
The proctiger is largely membranous with conspicuous paraprocts. These each consist 
of an apical and a basal portion separated by a break or joint (Fig. 61 (5)). The apical 
portions are continued into projecting curved processes (a) and carry ventrally smooth 
knob-like projections (b). They appear to represent the cerci. The basal portions pass 
dorsally to connect with the conical lobes of tergite IX towards their bases internally. They 
possibly represent sternite XI. On the dorsal aspect of the proctiger are two rather 
indefinite plates which appear to represent the tenth tergite. 
Situated ventrally to the proctiger is the heavily sclerotised phallosome (Fig. 60 (2), (4) 
Ph). This is shaped rather like a slightly open cockle shell with its open flanges directed 
ventrally and bearing on the distal portions of their edges short dark spinous processes. 
459 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
Lateral to the phallosome are the parameres. These are almond-shaped sclerites attached at 
their bases to the lateral plates of the phallosome and connected about the middle of their 
outer edge to a process of the basal apodeme of their side. 
In the usual conditions under which the terminalia are studied the phallosome in 
A. aegypti would appear as if it opened directly on the ventral surface proximal to the bases 
of the gonocoxites. Actually in this direction the whole area is completely closed over by 
membrane (the membranous portion of sternite IX) and there is no opening in this direction 
(Fig. 60 (2)). The opening of the pouch in which the phallosome lies is at the summit of 
the membranous fold between the bases of the gonocoxites and a little dorsally. The 
opening is, therefore, posterior to the ninth sternite. It is in fact close to the anus separated 
only by a narrow fold (Fig. 61 (7)). Situated just at this level are the two ventral processes 
of the paraprocts. It seems possible from the appearances seen in various preparations 
that these processes may function as the guardians of, if not the openers of, the mem- 
branous opening into the phallosome sac, for in sections they may be seen embedded in 
folds of membrane in this situation (Fig. 61 (6) b’). 
In the mosquito male terminalia three apodematous structures have been named, 
namely, the external apodeme, the apodeme of the side-piece and the basal apodeme. In 
A. aegypti, and possibly in all mosquitoes, the apodeme of the side-piece and the basal 
apodeme are two parts of what appears to be a single structure, namely the basal apodeme, 
of which the apodeme of the side piece is the more superficial part and the basal apodeme of 
some authors the deeper part. In A. aegypti both the external and basal apodeme originate 
as extensions of the edge of the gonocoxite, the external apodeme at its outer aspect and 
the basal apodeme from the sclerotised portion of the dorsal surface, the two apodemes in 
this species being continuous (Fig. 60 (2)). In many species the two apodemes are separated 
by an interval, the basal apodeme taking off more towards the middle line from the dorsal 
edge. In A. aegypti its position is apparently determined by the position and extent of the 
only sclerotised portion of this surface of the gonocoxite, that is, the narrow strip pre- 
viously referred to. This narrowness of the sclerotised portion of the dorsal surface of the 
gonocoxite is a character rather special to AEdes, the result of the large extent of membrane 
on the dorsal surface of the gonocoxite in this genus. In Anopheles where the whole gono- 
coxite surface is sclerotised the basal apodeme takes off from the extreme inner portion of 
this structure. 
The superficial,portion of the basal apodeme is a rather flat band continuing the narrow 
dorsal portion of the gonocoxite into the tissues (Fig. 60 (2)). It then expands into the 
Figure 60. Male terminalia. 
1 Dorsal view of male terminalia. 
2 Ventral view of same. a, expanded terminal portion of arm of ninth tergite ; KY’, membranous 
portion of ninth sternite; IXs”, sclerotised apodematous portion of the same. 
3 Lateral external view. Lettering as for 2. 
4 Lateral internal view as with the near gonocoxite removed. 
Lettering: ap.b, basal apodeme; ap.e, external apodeme; bl, basal lobe; bl’, proximal portion 
of fold carrying two hairs; 0, terminal portion of ventral sclerite of proctiger (probably cercus); 
Gc, gonocoxite; Gc’, membranous area of dorsal surface of same; Gc”, sclerotised ventral surface 
of gonocoxite; Hz, phallosome ; Ph’, the same seen behind membrane ; Pr, proctiger ; pr, paramere; 
sZ, style; sZ’, appendage of style; I%, X.Y, respective sternites; IXt, Xt, respective tergites. 
460 
a- 
Figure 60 
461 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
more basal portion which forms an expanded plate at somewhat of an angle to the first part 
(Fig. 60 (2) ape). Internally and ventrally the plate connects with the paramere and 
externally it is continued into a long spur-like process giving origin to a number of im- 
portant muscles as described later. 
There remains only to give a brief description of the musculature of the parts. A com- 
plete study of this has not been made, but the following is a numbered list of the more 
important muscles (Fig. 61 (8)). The musculature has also been dealt with by Martini 
(1922). See also Natvig (1948). 
1. A muscle arising from the outer aspect of the gonocoxite and inserted into the outer tubercle 
of the base of the style (extensor of the style). 
2. A massive muscle consisting of converging bands arising from an extensive area of the gono- 
coxite and inserted into the region of the inner tubercle of the base of the style (flexor of the style). 
3. A long muscle arising from the spur of the basal apodeme and passing up the whole length 
of the gonocoxite to be inserted in the region of the inner tubercle of the base of the style 
(adductor of the style). 
4. Muscular bands arising along the length of the apodematous portion of segment IX and 
passing up on each side of the phallosome to be inserted into the proximal portion of the basal 
lobe (retractor of the basal lobe). 
5. Muscle bands arising from the tenth tergite and inserted into the basal apodeme posteriorly. 
6. Massive muscles arising from the spur of the basal apodeme internal to no. 3 and inserted 
into the paramere distal to its articulation with the basal apodeme (protractor of the phallosome). 
The action of the muscles would appear to be adduction of the gonocoxites with flexion 
of the styles, the dragging downwards and inwards of the basal lobes and eversion of the 
phallosome by the powerful basal apodeme-paramere muscles. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 Figure 61. Male and female terminalia. 
Harpagonal fold with the two basal lobes. a, specialised hairs with angled tips; b, two hairs 
on fold possibly representing the harpago; c, thickened portion of membrane forming small 
plate. 
Basal lobe more highly magnified with hairs removed to show large sockets of specialised 
hairs and hairy portion of fold. a, sockets of large hairs including two with angled tips; 
b, hairs possibly representing the harpago. 
Specialised hair with angled tip. 
Appendage of style. 
Lateral view of proctiger. a, terminal cornu; b, process of ventral plate; c, basal sclerite of 
ventral plate (possibly XI sternite). 
Sagittal section a little lateral of median line to show genital opening. a, apex of ninth 
sternite; b, apex of proctiger ; b’, process of ventral plate; c, sclerotisations at base of phallo- 
some; KS’, membranous portion of ninth stern&e; KS”, sclerotised apodematous portion 
of same. 
Another section of same series in middle line. a, b, as in no. 6. 
Showing chief muscles numbered as given in list of muscles in the text. 
Dorsal view of female terminalia. 
Ventral view of same. 
Lateral view of same. a, cloaca-like hollow formed by overlapping sternal portion of seg- 
ment VIII. This is quite distinct from the more deeply situated atrium. 
Lettering: Ao, opening of anus; apb, basal apodeme; 0, cercus ; cw, cowl; Go, genital opening; 
hg, hinge; in, insula; Ph, phallosome; pgp, postgenital plate ; Rc, rectum; spd, opening of sperma- 
thecal duct; spm, spermathecae. 
462 . 
C 
, @lmm. 1 
, @lmm. 1 xt 005mm. 1 
0 1 
t y11 
VIIS I , @2mm. , 
Figure 61 
463 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
From the systematic point of view the male terminalia of Acdes aegypti are peculiar in 
several respects. Edwards notes that the conical lobes of tergite IX are peculiar among 
African species and Barraud that A. aegypti differs from all other Indian species, except 
A. (Stegomyia) desmotes, in the well-developed ventral arms of the paraprocts. The 
character of the basal lobe and its specialised hairs is also of systematic value. As also 
according to Mattingly (in Zit.) is the shape of the style. 
(g) THE FEMALE TERMINALIA 
The female genitalia or hypopygium, or, as many prefer, the female terminalia, of the 
mosquito have been studied by a number of observers : Macfie and Ingram (1922) ; 
Christophers (1923, whose description of the parts and terminology has been generally 
followed) ; Davis (1926, Anopheles) ; Freeborn (1926, AFdes) ; Gerry (1932, morphology) ; 
Gjullin (1937, 1946, Ai;des) ; Edwards (1941, who gives a good summary of structure and 
terminology with a useful plate giving characters of the different culicine genera) ; Bohart 
(1945, Agdes) ; Roth (1946, Wyeomyia) ; Ross (1947, 28 species) ; Coher (1948, a good 
recent account with generic characters). Useful papers are also Crampton (1942), on 
Panorpa ; Abul-Nasr (1950), on the development of the parts in Nematocera. 
The segments composing the female terminalia in different orders of insects are in the 
main as in the male, that is, segments IX-XI. But segment VIII is commonly also in- 
cluded, its appendages with those of segment IX forming the ovipositor when this is present. 
In the mosquito there is no ovipositor or indication of the parts forming such a structure. 
Nor is segment VIII, apart from its reduction in size in certain forms, much modified. 
Usually, however, its posterior border is indented or notched in the median line of the 
sternite. The tergite, other than reduction in size in certain forms, is not modified. 
Segment IX, especially the sternite, is almost eliminated, the segmental parts distal to 
segment VIII being little more than the postgenital plate (usually considered sternite XI), 
reduced tergite IX and possibly tergite X and the cerci. If sternite IX is present, it may be 
represented by the small hairy plate, the insula, described below. 
The chiefclue to the nature of the parts other than those mentioned lies in the existence 
of a deep invagination in the intersegmental membrane posterior to sternite VIII. As a 
result of this invagination there is approximation of the postgenital plate to sternite VIII 
closing in the parts so that a cloaca-like cavity is formed, the atrium. Into this cavity open 
three separate ducts, two relating to segment VIII, namely the common oviduct and the 
spermathecal duct, and one pertaining to segment IX, the opening of the caecus or mucus 
gland. It should perhaps be mentioned that the common oviduct does not directly open 
into the cavity but through a small terminal part, the vagina, as described when dealing 
later with the generative organs. 
The rim of the atrium is sclerotised, forming a narrow ribbon-like thickening surrounding 
a transversely elongate opening at the lateral angles of which it is sharply bent in, the whole 
strip strongly suggesting the metal framework of a clasp purse. The anterior portion of the 
rim is the sigma (Fig. 61 (10) si), the posterior portion the cowl (cw). At each corner where 
the sigma and cowl join there is usually a small thickening termed by Coher the hinge (hg). 
There may be further thickenings extending inwards from the hinges on to the roof of the 
atrium, atrial plates. In the median line, just anterior to the sigma and sometimes con- 
tinuous with this structure, is a small hairy sclerite, the insula (in). 
464 
THE FEMALE TERMINALIA 
In AEdes aegypti the parts conform to the above description, though, associated with the 
general reduction in size of the terminalia as a whole, the structures are small and rather 
ill-defined. Sternite VIII is bilobed with a median cleft in its posterior edge (Fig. 61 (10)). 
Tergite VIII, except for reduction in size, is not modified. Posterior to tergite VIII are two 
small hairy plates linked together basally by a rather indefinite thickening of the cuticle. 
These have been generally regarded as tergite IX. Beyond these small plates are the cerci 
(0). These are elongate flap-like structures well covered with hairs, but without scales. 
Ventrally, lying below the cerci, is the postgenitalplate (pgp). This has a median notch in 
its posterior border, giving it a somewhat bilobed appearance. It is largely freely pro- 
jecting, its ventral surface and the distal portion of the dorsal surface being covered with 
small hairs and in addition there are some larger hairs arising from small basal papillae 
towards the apex, one of which just ventral and one just dorsal to the apex of each lobe are 
longer than the others (Fig. 61 (10)). 
The appearance of the insula suggests that it is of segmental nature and it has been 
considered by some authors to be possibly sternite IX. It lies anterior to the atria1 opening, 
so that if the insula is sternite IX the opening of the oviduct and vagina is posterior to 
sternite IX, a position that is not usually accorded to it. Edwards (1941), p. 19, however, 
discussing this, considers that the female opening in the Diptera is, like that of the male, 
posterior to sternite IX, where it is situated in Panorpa, an ancestral form of the Diptera. 
A point in favour of such a view is that in many insects stemite IX is deficient in its central 
parts (see Christophers and Cragg (1922) on the female parts in Cimex). Edwards is also 
opposed to the assigning by Gerry (1932), and by Gjullin (1946), of the cowl to the ninth 
sternite. If such were the case, the opening of the caecus would be anterior to this sternite, 
which would not be in accordance with its position as shown by development. The structure 
termed insula by Abul-Nasr (1950) in several species of Nematocera lies between the 
spermathecal openings and anterior portion of the atrium which receives the oviduct and 
the posterior portion which receives the opening of the caecus, This would make it distinct 
from the insula as here described. 
REFERENCES 
(d) THE THORACIC APPENDAGES 
BAPRAUD, P. J. (1934). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1933). See references in previous chapter. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. and BARRAUD, P. J. (1924). The tracheation and venation of the wing of the 
mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 11, 1103-17. 
COMSTOCK, J. H. (1920). See references in previous chapter. 
COMSTOCK, J. H. and NEEDHAM, W. M. (1923). The Wings of Insects. The Comstock Publ. Co., 
Ithaca, New York. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. and HASEY, W. H. (1915). The basal sclerites of the leg in insects. 2002. J., 
Anat. 39, l-26. 
DAHL, F. (1884). Beitrage zur Kenntnis des Baues der Funktionen der Insektenbeine. Arch. 
Naturgesch. Jahrg. 50, 1, pp. 146-193. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1912). African Culicidae other than Anopheles (p. 7 male claws). Bull. Ent. Res. 
3, l-53. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
EWING, H. E. (1928). The legs and leg-bearing segments of some primitive arthropod groups etc. 
Smithson. Misc. CoZZ. 80, no. 11, 41 pp. 
30 465 CH 
IMAGO: EXTERNAL CHARACTERS 
GILLETT, J. D. and WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1932). The climbing organ of an insect Rhodnius 
prolixus (Hemiptera: Reduvidae). Proc. R. Sot. B, 111, 364-75. 
HUXLEY, T. H. (1906). The CrayJish. Ed. 6 (Ed. 1, 1879), Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co., 
London. 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). A General Textbook of Entomology. Methuen and Co., London. 
LOWNE, B. T. (1895). The Anatomy, PhysioZogy and Development of the BZowJy. Vol. II. Porter, 
London. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. and GRJEBINE, A. (1957). (Tibia1 claw.) In Press. Mem. Inst. Sci. 
Madagascar. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. and HAMON, J. (1955). Position taxonomique et synonymie de quelques 
Ficalbia de la region Ethiopian (Dipt. Culicidae). Ann. Parasit. hum. camp. 30, 488-96. 
NATVIG, L. R. (1948). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 46. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1901-1903). See references in ch. I (d), p. 17. 
PRASHAD, B. (1916). The halteres of mosquitoes and their function. Znd. J. Med. Res. 3,’ 503-9. 
PRASHAD, B. (1918). The thorax and wing of the mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 5, 610-40. 
PRINGLE, J. W. S. (1948). The gyroscopic mechanism of the halteres of Diptera. Phil. Trans. R. 
Sot. 233, 347-84. 
SHARP, D. (1899). Cambridge Natural History. Vol. VI, Insects. Macmillan and Co., London. 
SHIPLEY, A. E. (1915). Insects and war. XII. The mosquito Anopheles maculipennis. Brit. Med. J. 
1, 330-l. 
SHIPLEY, A. E. and WILSON, E. (1902). On a possible stridulating organ in the mosquito (Ano- 
pheles maculipennis). Trans. R. Sot. Edinb. 11, 387-72. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). See references in previous chapter. 
(f-g) MALE AND FEMALE TERMINALIA 
AEUL-NASR, S. E. (1950). Structure and development of the reproductive system of some species 
of Nematocera (order Diptera: suborder Nematocera). Phil. Trans. B, 234, 339-96. 
BARRAUD, P. J. (1934). See references in ch. II (a-b). 
BOHART, R. M. (1945). A synopsis of the Philippine mosquitoes. Nav. Med. Bull. 580, l-88. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1922). The development and structure of the terminal abdominal segments 
and hypopygium of the mosquito with observations on the homologies of the terminal 
segments of the larva. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 530-72. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1923). The structure and development of the female genital organs and 
hypopygium of the mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 698-719. 
1 CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. and BARRAUD, P. J. (1923). Descriptive terminology of male genitalic 
characters of mosquitoes. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 827-35. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. and CRAGG, F. W. (1922). On the so-called ‘penis’ of the bed-bug and the 
homologies generally of the male and female genitalia of this insect. Znd. J. Med. Res. 9, 
445-63. 
COHER, E. J. (1948). A study of the female genitalia of Culicidae: with particular reference to 
characters of generic value. Entom. Amer. 28, 75-l 12. 
CRAMPTON, G. C. (1942). See references in previous chapter. 
DAVIS, N. C. (1926). Notes on the female hypopygia of anopheline mosquitoes with special 
reference to some Brazilian species. Amer. J. Hyg. 6, 1-22. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1920). The nomenclature of the parts of the male hypopygium of Diptera 
Nematocera with special reference to mosquitoes. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 14, 23-40. 
EDWARDS, F. W. (1941). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
FREEBORN, S. B. (1924). The terminal abdominal segments of male mosquitoes. Amer. J. Hyg. 4, 
188-212. 
FREEBORN, S. B. (1926). The mosquitoes of California. Univ. Calif. PubZ. Ent. 3, 333-460. 
GERRY, B. I. (1932). Morphological studies of the female genitalia of Cuban mosquitoes. Ann. 
Ent. Sot. Amer. 25, 31-75. 
GJULLIN, C. M. (1937). The female genitalia of Ai;des mosquitoes of the Pacific Coast States. 
Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 39, 252-66. 
466 
REFERENCES 
GJULLIN, C. M. (1946). A key to the AL;des females of America north of Mexico. Proc. Ent. Sot. 
Wash. 48, 215-36. 
HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB (1912). See references in ch. I (j’), p. 19. 
IYENGAR, M. 0. T. and MENON, M. A. U. (1955). Mosquitoes of the Maldive Islands. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 46, l-9 (with appendix by Mattingly, P. F., 9-10). 
MACFIE, J. W. S. and INGRAM, A. (1922). On the genital armature of the female mosquito. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 16, 157-88. 
MARKS, E. N. (1949). Studies of Queensland mosquitoes. Part IV. Univ. Queensland Papers. 
Dep. Biol. 2, no. 11, l-41. 
MARSHALL, J. F. ( 1938). See references in previous chapter. 
MARTINI, E. (1922). Uber den Bau der ausseren mannlichen Geschlechtsorgane bei den Stech- 
m&ken. Arch. Naturgesch. Jahrg. 88, Abt. A, Heft 1, 134-42. 
MARTINI, E. (1928). Uber die segmentale Gliederung Nematoceran Dipteren. IV. Die Terminalia 
der Culiciden und Psychodiden. Zool. Anz. 76, 147-62. 
MATHESON, R. (1929). A Handbook of the Mosquitoes of North America. Bailliere, Tindall and 
Cox, London. 
NATVIG, L. R. (1948). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 46. 
PRUTHI, H. SINGH (1924). On the post-embryonic development and homologies of the male 
generative organs of Tenebrio molitor (Coleoptera). Proc. Zool. Sot. Lond. 1924, 857-68. 
ROOT, F. (1923). The male genitalia of some American Anopheles mosquitoes. Amer. J. Hyg. 3, 
264-79. 
ROOT, F. (1924). Further notes on the male genitalia of American Anopheles. Amer. J. Hyg. 4, 
456-65. 
ROSS, H. H. (1947). The mosquitoes of Illinois. Illinois Nat. Hist. Surv. Bull. 24, 1-16. 
ROTH, L. M. (1946). The female genitalia of Wyeomyia of North America. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 
39, 292-7. 
WESCHE, W. (1906). The genitalia of both sexes in Diptera and their relation to the armature of 
the mouth. Trans. Linn. Sot. Land. (2001.) (2), 9, Part X, 339-86. 
467 30-2 
xx 
THE IMAGO: 
FOOD AND FEEDING 
(a) NATURE OF FOOD 
That the natural food of the female mosquito in the majority of species is blood from some 
vertebrate host and that the male does not suck blood is the result of general experience. 
This applies in full measure to Ai;des aegypti, the female of which, whether in nature or in 
the laboratory, is a particularly active biter and feeds readily and consistently under most 
circumstances when given the opportunity. The male, though it may annoy by hovering 
about and even in some circumstances settling on the skin, does not attempt to puncture. 
The female may, however, maintain existence for long periods on food other than blood. 
Goeldi (1905) kept females alive 3 l-102 days fed on honey. Macfie (19 15) notes that 
females take honey for the first day or two and that males feed only on honey. Bonne- 
Wepster and Brug (1932) note that sugar-containing fluids are readily taken. Gordon 
(1922 b) observed both females and males sucking fluid from flowers. Many observers have 
observed that sugary fluids, raisins, banana, etc., are sucked by both sexes and it is a 
common practice to put such material in the mosquito cage to maintain the insects alive. 
In the case of food of this kind the fluid does not, however, pass into the mid-gut but into 
the diverticula as described later, and apart from experimental feeding (through membranes 
or in other artificial ways) the taking of other food than blood by the female is in an 
altogether different category from, and unaccompanied by many characteristic features in 
the insect’s behaviour when taking the main object of her existence, the blood meal. 
Further, without such a meal eggs are not developed and the insect does not oviposit. 
Finlay (1886) found that A. calopus (aegypti) could not develop its eggs without blood. 
Goeldi (1905), after numerous experiments with fruit, sugar, honey, etc., came to the con- 
clusion that blood was necessary for the production of eggs. Fielding (19 19) kept females 
alive for 25 to 142 days fed on a variety of foods (sugar, peptone, apples, etc.), but failed 
to obtain eggs. Sen (19 1 S), dealing with a closely related species, A. albopictus, records, 
however, that eggs were laid on a diet of milk and protein and on two occasions on cane 
sugar only. Such experiences are, however, very unusual and not only does oviposition 
not occur in the absence of a blood meal but development of the ovarian follicles beyond 
a certain early stage does not take place. 
In the case of A. aegypti the blood meal is very commonly, but not necessarily, human 
blood. Of blood other than human, Boyce (1907) states that the species feeds normally on 
warm-blooded vertebrates. Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) note that, while human blood 
is preferred, A. aegypti will also feed on mammals and birds. Other authors (Connor, 
1922; Gordon, 1922 b) have had the same experience and Davis and Philip (193 1) found 
occasionally in nature that the precipitin test was positive for chicken blood. Gordon 
(1922b) found A. aegypti feeding with great voracity on bats. Kumm (1932) records the 
468 
THE FOOD 
same. The species is now commonly fed in the laboratory with full gorging and good egg 
’ development on chicken’s blood (James and Tate, 1938 ; Bishop and Gilchrist, 1946; and 
others). It is also commonly fed on the guinea-pig and rabbit. But whilst it can be fed on 
experimental animals these do not always form a good substitute in the laboratory for 
human blood. Fielding (1919) found feeding with small animals as a rule unsuccessful even 
if left overnight. Lewis (1933) notes that A. aegypti will feed on the guinea-pig only if the 
animal is shaved. Mathis (1934) found that for oviposition several blood meals are neces- 
sary if fed on the rabbit, whilst it is exceptional for more than one feed to be required when 
fed on human blood. Much depends upon the technique used and feeding on small 
animals usually requires immobilisation and shaving of some part. With suitable technique 
many authors use the guinea-pig for routine feeding for oviposition and the writer has 
found the rabbit an exceptionally useful animal for the purpose, the insects feeding readily 
and fully on the shaved abdomen using the attachment already described. With suitable 
technique Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) and other authors have similarly found the chicken 
a very suitable animal for routine use with the species. 
How far A. aegypti will feed upon cold-blooded vertebrates is less certain. Goeldi failed 
to get the species to feed on a lizard and Gordon (19223) similarly failed with the gecko. 
Woke (1937 a), however, succeeded in getting the species to take a full blood meal from the 
frog and from the turtle. He found (1937b) that more eggs were produced per cubic milli- 
metre from the blood of turtle, frog, canary, rabbit and guinea-pig, in this order, than from 
that of man or monkey. From other data given, however, it was clear that much less blood 
was taken from cold blooded animals per feed, so that in effect production from feeding on 
mammals was greater. Gordon and Lumsden (1939) found difficulty in getting A. aegypti 
to feed on the frog’s foot and that the insects only did so when excited in the first instance 
by an interrupted feed on man. 
Whatever source of blood A. aegypti may at times utilise there is little doubt from the 
domestic habits of the species as ordinarily encountered and its close association with man 
that its normal blood food is that of man. 
Whether there is any selective preference for particular races or individuals is a question 
often raised. Connor (1922) found white races preferred to coloured and that the young and 
healthy were most often bitten. Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903) as also Gordon 
(1922a) found, however, no difference between sweating and dry, hairy or smooth skin, 
or young or old persons, or nationality. Some statements in this respect may be based 
more upon the immediate or after effects of the bites than upon actual observation of the 
number of bites. An old resident, probably to a considerable extent immunised to bites, 
may take little note of such bites as he receives, since there is a minimum of reaction. But 
to the new-comer the immediate and after effects of even a single bite usually attracts 
attention. Further, since the biting urge is largely excited by the temperature of the object 
bitten, it is very probable that young persons with highly vascular skins would be especially 
attractive. On the whole, however, it may be doubted whether a hungry A. aegypti female 
would take much note of the delicate distinction between one nationality and another or 
between individuals. The question how far smell may be concerned is dealt with later. In 
general it may be said that evidence is against the view that smell enters largely into the 
urge to attack and that any effect it might have is almost certainly overshadowed by the 
species’ reaction to temperature. 
Feeding on the human corpse has been recorded by several observers. Durham (quoted 
469 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
by Theobald, 1903) observed a specimen of A. aegypti feeding on the inner side of the thigh 
of a Chinaman dead 3 hours where it was allowed nearly to fill itself. Rosenau, Francis and 
Goldberger (quoted by Howard, Dyar and Knab) record the species as sucking blood from 
the human corpse 6 or even 12 hours after death. Howard, Dyar and Knab found female 
A. aegypti feeding on a corpse 12 hours after death, but only one out of a number apparently 
obtained blood. Three mosquitoes in another case succeeded in doing so half an hour-after 
death. Gordon (1922 b) states that A. aegypti will bite corpses as long as 18 hours after 
death and will draw blood as long as 6 hours after. Though feeding on corpses has an 
importance in connection with the spread of yellow fever, it does not raise any very special 
point as to food selection, since, provided the corpse is still warm, as may well be the case 
under tropical conditions, or even as a result of postmortem changes, there is nothing 
unusual in A. aegypti being attracted to and attempting to prod any warm object and at 
some hypostatically congested part obtaining blood. 
Female A. aegypti, as shown by Bishop and Gilchrist (1946), will feed through a membrane 
upon whole blood, but not upon plasma, even though presented at 40-42” C. Under such 
circumstances a suspension of twice-washed red cells in citrate in equal volume to the 
plasma removed was fully gorged upon, though the percentage doing so was lower than 
with full blood. Blood haemolysed by freezing and thawing gave a still smaller percentage 
feeding, whilst the majority of those that did feed imbibed only a small amount. Dilution 
of the haemolysed blood to reduce the high viscosity led to fewer still feeding. On a sus- 
pension of rice starch granules in a solution of haemoglobin they refused to feed. 
The effect of the red cells in modifying the physical properties of plasma will be very 
apparent to anyone attempting to make a thin film of plasma or very anaemic blood and 
contrasting the experience with that obtained from whole blood or red cells in citrate, both 
of which film perfectly. 
Much depends also upon the form in which blood or fluids are presented. The above 
observers found that fluid presented in open drops often give rise to a reaction different to 
that to the same fluid presented behind a membrane. A much smaller percentage fed on 
heparinised blood presented openly than when this was offered behind a membrane. 
Haemoglobin in plasma was not imbibed when presented in drops, though it was taken 
through a membrane. A small number, however, imbibed haemoglobin in water from 
drops. Plasma was not taken either in drops or through a membrane. Saturated glucose 
solution was taken by a large proportion of the mosquitoes, the fluid passing to the 
diverticula. It seems possible that the physical properties of the fluids, to some extent at 
least, may determine whether they are imbibed or not, especially as such fluids have to be 
passed very rapidly through the excessively fine blood channel, approximately only 0.03 mm 
(30~) in diameter. 
Briefly summarising, it may be concluded that there are two forms of food of quite 
different nature taken by the female mosquito, namely (a) blood from a living host, the 
act being accompanied by all the vivid reactions of the insect to such an episode and leading 
to eventual oviposition; and (b) various fluids (including water), but especially sweet fluids 
such as honey, glucose, etc., taken much as by any creature, useful for maintaining life, 
but not leading to oviposition and not associated with the violent impulses and zest that 
characterise desire for the first type. 
Of interest as to the effect of sweetness in stimulating feeding are the observations by 
Lang and Wallis (1956). These authors note that sugars act as a stimulant to feeding, 
470 
THE FOOD 
sucrose being the most effective of a number of sugars experimented with (lactose, glucose, 
sucrose, and fructose). An interesting point noted is that the attractiveness to the mosquito 
differs somewhat from their sweetness to man, and very noticeably that glycerine which is 
relatively sweet to man had little attractiveness for AL;des aegypti. The following figures are 
given for 10 per cent concentrations of different sugars and glycerine in attractiveness to 
A. aegypti. Man A. aegypti 
Water 0 0 
Lactose 16 12 
Glucose 74 56 
Sucrose 100 100 
Glycerine 108 4 
Fructose 173 52 
The nutritive value of different bloods, for example, mammalian or avian, or even 
different mammalian bloods, in relation to oviposition appears to vary somewhat, as 
also does the amount imbibed at a meal. Such questions have been investigated chiefly by 
Woke (1937 a, b). The amount of blood taken in relation to the development and number 
of eggs laid is discussed in chapter XXII. 
(b) TIME FROM EMERGENCE TO FIRST 
BLOOD MEAL 
That a certain time elapses after emergence before the female will attempt to feed is well 
recognised. Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903) state that the female is ready to feed 
in about 24 hours after emergence. Drake-Brockman (1913) was never able to get 
A. aegypti to feed on the same day as emergence. Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912) refer 
to Peryassu as saying that both fertilised and virgin females can be induced to suck blood 
18 hours after emergence, and Howard (1923) states that the female will bite 18-24 hours 
after emergence. Macfie (1915) found that, when given opportunity for feeding at least 
twice daily, females fed for the first time on the second day, more often on the third day. 
H. A. Johnson (1937) says that the first blood meal is taken 20-40 hours from emergence. 
Seaton and Lumsden (1941), investigating this question, found that out of lOOmosquitoes 
only seven fed in the first 24 hours from emergence, twenty-seven 24 and 48 hours and 
forty-four in the next 24 hours. Between 72 and 96 hours sixty-two fed and between 96 
and 120 hours seventy fed. After the fifth day there was a marked decline associated with 
high mortality. Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) also give data for three strains of A. aegypti 
fed: (1) on the chicken; (2) through a membrane on chicken blood. The mosquitoes in the 
first-mentioned series were applied to the breast of the chicken in a biting box in the dark 
at 28” C. in a moist atmosphere and 30 minutes allowed for the feed. Only a few (O-6 per 
cent) fed in the first 24 hours. Somewhat under 50 per cent fed between 24 and 48 hours 
and in two strains 76 and 95 per cent between 48 and 72 hours. Through membrane the 
number feeding was considerably lower, the three strains on the fourth day giving only 
54, 73 and 30 per cent feeds respectively. 
In routine standard testing extending over many months the present author found that 
females reared and allowed to emerge at 28” C. and hereafter kept at 25” C. and relative 
humidity of 80 per cent in the dark without other food than water reached maximum 
biting potential on the human arm on the fifth to seventh day (Christophers, 1947). Under 
471 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
good conditions (well-reared mosquitoes, warm arm and other suitable conditions) 
feeding within an allowed 15 minutes should approach or reach 100 per cent. The majority 
of females will, however, feed even by the third day or even second day from emergence 
and a variable proportion may feed even on the day following emergence. In this last case 
gorging may be deficient. Thus in a cage of 100 female and 100 male mosquitoes offered 
the arm for 15 minutes on the day following emergence forty-one females fed of which 
twenty-eight were fully gorged and thirteen only partially so. 
Though males were usually included along with the females in the cages, their presence or 
absence appeared to make little difference to feeding for the first blood meal. In a cage 
containing 175 females reared from female pupae and without access to males offered the 
arm for 26 minutes, 116 were considered gorged to the fullest extent (mean weight after feed 
6.60 mg.) and fifty-nine very nearly so (mean weight 5.90 mg.). This does not apply to 
subsequent feeds by unfertilized females as noted later. 
(c) TIME OF SUBSEQUENT BLOOD FEEDS 
Once fully gorged, which is the normal condition following an undisturbed human blood 
meal, the female does not feed again until after oviposition. Macfie (19 15) offered females 
that had fed a blood feed twice daily, but they did not feed again until eggs had been laid. 
The same author notes that after oviposition the female is ready, almost at once, for the 
next feed and that it sets out to search for food as soon as the eggs are laid. Bacot (1916) 
says that vigorous females feed within 24 hours of egg laying. David, Bracey and Harvey 
(1944) state that feeding takes place on the day of oviposition. Since oviposition normally 
is completed about 3 days from the blood meal, the female with the necessary opportunity 
feeds subsequently about every third or fourth day (Macfie, 1915). H. A. Johnson (1937) 
gives the intervals as short as 2 days. According to Macfie (19 15) unfertilised females do 
not feed at regular intervals. 
Under artificial conditions the number of feeds in the life of the mosquito may be very 
considerable. Macfie (19 15) records instances of fifteen and ten feeds in mosquitoes living 
respectively 50 and 60 days. Howard (1923) records that in 3 1 days a female fed twelve 
times at mean intervals of 2.6 days. The great majority of females under ordinary labora- 
tory conditions, however, do not survive for such long periods. Following the first feed 
the numbers in a cage considerably diminish and after a second feed mortality is very heavy. 
(d) TIME OF DAY OF FEEDING 
AL;des aegypti is of active diurnal habit and is widely known in the tropics as the day-biting 
mosquito. Durham and Myers (1902), speaking of Manaos, say that A. aegypti is very 
active in the early afternoon, but after sundown there is not one. Dutton (1903), speaking 
of West Africa, says it only bites during the day. Goeldi (1905) says that at Para it bites 
from sunrise to sunset. Doane (1914) says it ceases to feed at night when Culex fatigans 
takes over. Howlett (1913) says it hardly ever bites after dark. Howard, Dyar and Knab 
(19 12) say that if it bites by night it does so in lamp-lighted rooms. Marchoux, Salimbeni 
and Simond (1903), however, held that Aedes aegypti bit by day and night during the first 
6-8 days from emergence, but later at night only. In general, authors have not supported 
472 
SUBSEQUENT FEEDING TIMES 
this view (Carter, 1904; Siler, Hall and Hichens, 1926 ; Bonne and Bonne-Wepster, 1925). 
That the species may feed at night is, however, shown by the observations of Gordon and 
Young (1921). These authors liberated thirty-one marked females in a room at night not 
less than 14 days from their first blood meal. During the succeeding 4 days five marked 
and three unmarked fed during daylight. None were observed to feed at night. Of fifty 
similarly liberated, ten marked and ten unmarked fed in daylight, six marked and eight 
unmarked at night. Schwetz (1915) describes it as biting towards evening and as very active 
after sunset; later, 7-8 p.m., it ceases to attack. There seems little doubt that A. aegypti as 
commonly encountered is definitely diurnal in its habits, though it very characteristically 
clings to dark corners and shady places and may under certain circumstances attack at 
night. How far this may cease to apply under some conditions is further discussed below. 
In the laboratory the species feeds readily at all times of the day, in light or in the dark. 
Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) performed their feeding experiments on chickens, or through 
membranes, in the dark, obtaining 94 per cent gorged on the chicken in 30 minutes 
exposure. The present author, using the same standard technique as when feeding in the 
normal routine, but with the arm introduced and allowed to remain in the cage in complete 
darkness, observed no marked difference either in the number of wheals produced in 
15 minutes exposure, or so far as could be ascertained in the rate of settling on the arm. 
Recently there have been references to A. aegypti in native huts in tropical Africa feeding 
by night. Lumsden (1957), referring to conditions in Southern Province, Tanganyika, and 
investigating the time of feeding of A. aegypti as shown by hourly baited catches, notes that, 
though the activity of the A. aegypti female is diurnal, the night activity is by no means 
insignificant. He gives the following figures as the result of a 48 hours baited catch in a hut. 
Hut Hut 
interior verandah 
BY day 1280 416 
By night 669 189 
Day and night were taken as between sunrise and sunset, in this case about 5 a.m. to 
5 p.m. for the day catches. A noticeable feature was the occurrence of periods of special 
activity. From the charts given, maximal catches in the hut interior for females are notable 
at 8 a.m. (159), 2 p.m. (199), 9 p.m. (107) and 3 a.m. (102). In the verandah catches of 
fifty or over were at 5 a.m. (50), 8 a.m. (52), 1 p.m. (72), 5 p.m. (50). During the day the 
number of females caught in the verandah, allowing an hour before and after sunrise and 
sunset for probable daylight, was 466 as against 134 (77.6 per cent). In the hut with the same 
provision the numbers were 1398 and 574 (70.9 per cent) or very little different. The hut 
interiors are noted by the author to be practically dark even by day, and a point of possible 
importance in reference to what is said below is that in making the catches it was necessary 
to use lamps. Besides females a considerable number of males were captured on the bait, 
a total of 249 and 354 in the hut and verandah respectively as compared with 1973 and 621 
for females. Much other information is given in this very interesting paper which space 
does not allow further to enter into. 
The choice of daytime so commonly associated with this species in its annoying activities 
would seem therefore to be dependent on other factors than a natural instinct to feed only by 
day. Whilst much no doubt remains to be ascertained regarding habits of the species in 
nature, it is thought that the following may give some explanation of contradictory 
experiences described. In searching for its food, as noted in the section dealing with 
473 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
reactions of the imago (ch. XXIV), A. aegypti appears to be influenced by two major con- 
siderations, namely attraction to dark moving objects, operative therefore at a distance 
from the food source, and attraction by warm air convection currents, obviously most 
marked near the source. In an experimental cage the effect is demonstrably almost, if not 
entirely, the second form of attraction. In an open room, however, there is reason to 
believe that the first form of attraction is that chiefly operative. Under many circumstances 
this might be sufficient to give the general effect, as commonly seen in better class houses, of 
mosquitoes active and troublesome in rooms by day and ceasing to be so by night. In a 
dark hut the circumstances might more nearly resemble those seen in the laboratory where 
the species is being studied in a cage. 
Apart from special circumstances that may affect behaviour of the species there can be 
no doubt that compared with many mosquitoes, and including almost all anophelines and 
the majority of culicines, A. aegypti is in the main of diurnal habits. 
(e) EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE AND OF SOME OTHER 
CONDITIONS ON FEEDING 
EFFECT OF ENVIRONMENTAL TEMPERATURE 
The effect of temperature on feeding is rather complex. It includes the effect on the insect 
of the temperature of the air forming its environment, the temperature of the potential 
food source, the relation between this and the temperature of the environment and the 
question of convection currents set up by the food source. For the present we are concerned 
only with the direct effect of low and high temperature of the environment on feeding. 
Environmental temperature appears to affect feeding mainly through the general effect 
upon the activity of the insect, which will in the main attempt to bite at any temperature 
which leaves it physically able to attack. 
The lower temperature limit. At low temperatures somewhat above the lethal point 
A. aegypti becomes torpid, unable to fly or even move its limbs except slowly and with 
difficulty. In such condition it is rendered incapable of attacking. Otto and Neumann 
(1905) record that exposed out of doors to freezing it is killed. At 4” C. it could be revived 
after an hour, but with longer exposures it was killed. At 7-9” C. females were rendered 
stiff and moved slowly and were nearly always on the bottom of the jar, presumably being 
unable to cling to the glass sides of the vessel. Lewis (1933) found A. aegypti at 10” C. 
dormant and only stimulated to move when warmed. The temperature at which the 
insects cease to bite has been very commonly given as about 15” C. (Marchoux et al. 1903; 
Howard et al. 19 12; Connor, 1924). Reed and Carroll note that it will bite at 63” F. 
(17” C.) and above. They have never succeeded in getting the species to feed below this 
temperature. Cossio (1931) records A. aegypti as biting in nature at 15” C. and experi- 
mentally at 14” C. Gutzevich (1931) notes that A. aegypti on the Black Sea Coast does not 
feed or oviposit below 16” C. In the author’s laboratory at Cambridge escaped free 
A. aegypti attacked in an attempt to feed during some cold weather at a temperature in 
the room of 15” C. This would appear to be the lower temperature limit for such activity. 
Optimal temperature. What exact temperature is optimal for biting can only be very 
generally stated. Marchoux et al. (1903) note that between 19” and 25” C. females are slow 
474 
TEMPERATURE AND OTHER EFFECTS 
to bite, but that from 26” to 35” C. they will largely feed. Connor (1924) states that the 
species is most active at 28” C., and this temperature is very generally considered by 
authors optimal for the species. Aragao (1939) gives between 27” and 32” C. as the vital 
optimum, all vital activities being retarded between 25” and 17”, whilst below 17” C. they 
cease. Seaton and Lumsden (1941) for their controlled experiments used a fixed tempera- 
ture of 24-26” C. Our own experience is that the biting activity at 28” C. with high 
humidity is somewhat greater than at 25” C. At both temperatures and relative humidity 
of 70 per cent or over they settle to feed rapidly and as a rule gorge fully within 5 minutes 
(Christophers, 1947). Under favourable conditions even lower environmental temperatures 
seem quite compatible with active attacking and gorging. We have found that in cages 
they will settle rapidly on the arm and gorge well, provided the arm is warm, at 18” C. 
Higher temperature limit. Regarding biting at air temperatures above 28” C. there is little 
information. Lewis (1933) at 35” C. obtained 11 per cent feeding at 96 per cent relative 
humidity and 17 per cent at 77 per cent relative humidity, the figures not being very dif- 
ferent to those obtained at 30” C. None fed at 40” C. and relative humidity 83 per cent. 
As will be shown later, 40” C. is practically a lethal temperature for the adult. 
EFFECT OF HUMIDITY 
That a high humidity is favourable to the life of the species is well recognised and in nature 
attack by the insect is most common in relatively high humidities. But biting may take 
place quite freely at lower humidities, for example, at ordinary English summer tempera- 
ture and humidity. For routine testing a relative humidity of 70-90 per cent at 25” C. was 
found to ensure maximum and standard settling and biting effects. As noted by Lumsden 
(1947) relative humidity at time of biting did not appear to be of importance. A very high 
humidity has, however, been noted as having a deterrent effect on feeding at higher 
temperatures. 
EFFECT OF LIGHT 
Light, if subdued, does not appear to have a deterrent effect. But during feeding under an 
electric light it was noticeable that the insects when settling to feed tended to avoid the 
illuminated area for those in shadow. The question has been studied under controlled 
conditions by Seaton and Lumsden (1941). These authors found that light (O-5 metre 
candles at the skin surface) reduced the number of fourth-day mosquitoes feeding at 
24-26” C. and Hg. sat. def. 4.5-5.5 mm. by almost half. Of 100 mosquitoes fed in lots of 
ten, sixty fed in darkness and thirty-four in light. This is in keeping with the known habit 
of the species in nature of attacking in the subdued light of dark corners and on the shady 
side of the victim. 
EFFECT OF FERTILISATION 
That fertilisation is not necessary to ensure the female feeding has been noted by a number 
of observers and the point has been put to careful test by Seaton and Lumsden (1941). 
Experiments by these authors showed that the presence of males up to the third day from 
emergence made no difference in the number feeding. The present author’s experience in 
the same direction has already been given. This applies, however, only to the first blood 
meal, the course of subsequent feeds being much modified by the irregular ovarian develop- 
ment as shown later. 
475 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
OTHER GENERAL CONDITIONS AFFECTING FEEDING 
Some effect upon biting potential was thought to result when the insects had been pre- 
viously allowed to feed on sugar, fruit and even water shortly before experiment. Thus 
deprivation from water for an hour combined with exposure to light was found greatly to 
increase and standardise biting activity and was used as a routine. The use of sugar solution 
or fruit has been widely used by observers with the idea of maintaining the life of the 
insects. Except for the purpose of maintaining insects alive for special purpose over long 
periods such usage would not seem desirable where critical experimentation on biting 
activity is being carried out and where the condition of the insects used should be as 
standardised as possible. Up to the seventh day such feeding is, with suitable technique, 
unnecessary and introduces an unknown factor where every endeavour should be to 
reduce conditions to the simplest possible. 
Moistening the skin when mosquitoes were sluggish has been thought by some observers 
to be conducive to a more rapid settling rate. Lumsden and Bertram (1940) noted that 
mosquitoes showing reluctance to feed could often be induced to do so if saliva were 
applied to the skin when feeding on the fowl. This, however, was not found to have any 
effect by Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) in their feeding experiments using the chicken. 
Sweating was not found by Gordon (1922a) to affect biting. Out of thirty individuals 
sweating and fifty-eight not sweating the average bites per individual was in both cases 
seven. Our own experience has been that sweating, if it did not increase the settling and 
biting rate, did not interfere with it. In this case the arm is bound to be warm and thus 
favourable to biting. 
Presence of a heavy growth of hair was to some extent deterrent to rate of settling, but, 
unless combined with presence of repellents, was not eventually protective. Gordon 
(1922a) found the mean number of bites for ‘hairiness showing ’ and ‘hairiness not 
showing’ to be respectively 7.1 and 6.9. 
Of all influences adversely affecting biting (short of sublethal temperatures and other 
abnormal conditions) the most obvious was lack of warmth of the observer’s skin. On a 
cold day introduction of a cold arm into a cage gave delayed feeding. Warming up the arm 
before introduction had an entirely different effect. Few results in respect to feeding urge 
are more illuminating than those of Howlett (1910) who, using a warm test-tube, showed 
that this when held upright gave reduced attraction, thus showing that it was warm 
convection currents rather than radiant heat that was effective in bringing about attack (see 
ch. XXIV, p. 540). The species in this case was A. albopictus the behaviour of which is very 
similar to that of A. aegypti. Crumb (1922) has observed a similar effect with Culexpipiens. 
(f> CHEMICAL ATTRACTANTS AND REPELLENTS 
Chemical substances having an attractive effect appear to be rare and such as have been 
shown to have such an effect possess it in very moderate degree. Crumb, though he found 
warmth powerfully attractive to Culex pipiens, notes that the components of perspiration 
and blood produced only faint erratic response. Rudolfs (1922, 1930) with Ai;des sollicitans 
and other species also found sweat, sebaceous secretions and many other substances little 
attractive. But COz and weak ammonia were ‘strongly activating’. Van Thiel (1935), as 
also Reuter (1936), found with Anopheles atroparvus that acids in human sweat did not 
476 
ATTRACTANTS AND REPELLENTS 
attract. Bates (1949) was never able to trap mosquitoes using absorbent cotton that had 
been rubbed over sweating animals as bait, though it was easy to trap mosquitoes with 
vegetable bait such as slices of apple or sugar solutions. Parker (1948), as also Willis 
(1947), found human arm odour attractive. It seems very doubtful if olfactory stimuli are 
important or necessary in causing Ai;des aegypti to attack with the object of feeding. There 
is clearly too a distinction between the urge with which a female A. aegypti is attracted, say 
to fruit or sugar solution, and the excited behaviour of the insect intent on attacking for 
the purpose of a blood meal. This is evident not only in the time taken to produce the 
result, but in the characteristic behaviour of the insect. 
Chemical substances having a repellent effect are, on the contrary, many and various. 
During the last war very considerable research was undertaken in testing and evaluating 
large nurnbers of chemical substances with a view to selecting those that could most 
effectively be employed in protection of troops from the bites of mosquitoes. As a result 
three substances became especially recognised as suitable for such use, namely indalone, 
a proprietary preparation ; Rutger’s 6 12 (2-ethylhexane- 1: 3-diol) synthesised at Rutger’s 
University and dimethyl phthalate. Of these dimethyl phthalate (commonly referred to as 
DMP) has now come chiefly into use. For an account of the history, method of testing and 
chemical nature and properties of repellent substances with a bibliography see Christo- 
phers (1947) and for some points regarding repellents for civilian use, Christophers (1945). 
An account of the work done at Orlando, 1942-7, is given by Travis et al. (1949). For other 
work of more recent date see Knipling and Dove (1944) ; Dethier (1947) ; Travis and Smith 
(1951); Sarkaria and Brown (1951); King (1951); Roadhouse (1953). For tests in the field 
against northern AEde,s in Canada see Applethwaite and Smith (1950) ; Applethwaite and 
Cross (1951); Altman and Smith (1955). 
Three points are of special importance in the selection of compounds suitable for use as 
repellents; these are: (1) the degree of repellent effect; (2) the permanence of this effect 
when the substance is spread upon human skin; and (3) absence of irritant or toxic effect. 
It is also useful to know its boiling point and viscosity (see Christophers, 1947). 
Whilst tests of efficacy in the field have played an important part in determining the value 
of different compounds, accurate information has mainly resulted from testing in the 
laboratory. In this latter respect A. aegypti has been very largely used. Such tests are 
valuable largely in proportion to the use of standardised conditions employed. The fol- 
lowing are substances that with the author have yielded high degrees of repellency. They 
are given with a rating value which requires some explanation. A substance may be very 
effective but its effect short-lasting. Or it may be only moderately effective, but very lasting. 
All grades may be found in regard to these two points. In the rating value given in the list 
complete repellency from 10 c.mm. spread on the arm per square inch is indicated by 
A, A’ means an equivalent effect but at half the dose, and A” the same with a still 
further halving of the dose. The figure after the stroke indicates the number of hours 
that the substance in that dosage under standard conditions remains completely effective 
as shown overleaf. 
The degree of permanence is largely dependent upon the boiling point of the compound. 
Thus, to give a longer protection in the standard dose than 2 hours the boiling point must 
be at least about 200” C. For this reason many powerful repellents, such as citronella, 
lack the permanence required for military purposes, that is at least 6 hours, and usually 
give protection for about 2 hours. With boiling point over 300” C. there is a tendency for 
477 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
the substance to give lasting effect but of relatively poor intensity. Thus dimethyl phthalate 
with boiling point of 282” C. gives about the optimum effect for the 6 hours required 
duration, but dibutyl phthalate with boiling point 325” C. gives a poorer repellency. On 
account of its higher boiling point, however, dibutyl phthalate has been much used for 
rendering clothing protective, since articles impregnated with this substance retain repellent 
effect for long periods and after washing. 
Boiling point 
Substance (” C.) Rating 
Oil of citronella - A/2 
Citronella1 80.7 A/4 
Citronellol - A/4 
Hydroxycitronellal - A’/6 
Oil of cassia (cinnamic aldehyde) 246 A/4 
Rutger’s 6 12 - A’/6 
Another related diol 328 Al6 
An unsaturated long chain dihydric 314 A”/6 
alcohol 
Dimethyl phthalate 282-5 A’/6 
Di-butyl phthalate 325 B/2 
Di-ethyl cinnamate 271-5 A’/6 
Isopropyl cinnamate 342 A/2 
Trichloroacetyl aminoethyl chloride - A”/6 
(15 per cent in ointment) 
Whilst a high degree of permanence has been regarded as an essential requirement for 
protection of troops in the field, this is less essential as a rule for civilian use and some of 
the lower boiling point repellents may here be more useful, for besides being often more 
effective for a period of, say, 2 hours, they have the great advantage of being more effective 
at a distance. Thus very often in place of all skin areas requiring to be covered, it may be 
necessary only to apply the substance here and there on the clothing, for example on the 
socks or about the wrists or behind the collar. The most commonly used repellent of this 
type is oil of citronella, but there are still more effective substances that could be used, 
such as citronellal, the active principle, or hydroxycitronellal, a very effective repellent 
with a pleasant smell. The chief precaution necessary is that the substance should not be 
irritant or poisonous. 
What the essential reason may be for a substance to be repellent is not known. Many 
such compounds have citrous or other quite pleasant smells. The high boiling point esters 
of the lower methyl series and high molecular weight organic acids (phthalic, adipic, 
cinnamic, citric, etc.) appear to owe their repellent effect to methyl radicles in suitable 
combination. In the long chain alcohols it is apparently the position of the OH groups 
which ensures repellency, the methyl radicles being little concerned. 
Repellent substances may be used ‘ neat ’ by being spread thinly by smearing over exposed 
skin, but may also be used in the form of some pharmaceutical preparation, such as a 
lotion, cream or ointment, a cream being that for the most part adopted. In general the 
neat application is the most effective but may be unpleasant for delicate skins. Dimethyl 
phthalate (DMP) is not very readily combined in any considerable strength as a cream 
owing to its low viscosity, a favourable condition for the ‘neat’ use. The following, how- 
ever, is a permanent cream spreading readily and containing 25 per cent of the compound: 
Dimethyl phthalate 
White wax B.P. 
Arachis oil 
478 12.5 C.C. 
9.0 g. 
27-5 cc. 
ATTRACTANTS AND REPELLENTS 
Melt the wax in the arachis oil over a water-bath and stir in the dimethyl phthalate. If 
necessary filter through a little wool. Put up as an ointment in a wide-mouthed bottle or 
pot. Though it contains wax it is not waxy or unpleasant on this account and may be 
varied slightly in composition to meet climatic requirements. Or an excellent cream can be 
made using 70 per cent DMP and 30 per cent magnesium stearate. 
Oil of citronella is liable to be adulterated and a good Java or other guaranteed oil should 
be obtained, or if cost is not very material the essential compound citronella1 or citronellol 
used. Such low boiling point compounds can usually be put up as creams or more simply 
applied here and there on clothing, etc. Some preparations on sale for use against mosquito 
bites appear to be based on the idea that more of the substance can be included by use of 
zinc oxide as an adsorbent, but even if the adsorbed compound is really active the cosmetic 
effect of zinc oxide makes such preparations very undesirable. For information about 
impregnation of clothing and other facts connected with repellents see Christophers (1947). 
It is understood that Dr Busvine is shortly publishing a paper on repellents. 
(g) BITING RATE 
Various methods have been used to indicate the number and intensity of attacks by mos- 
quitoes, either in the open under natural conditions or in cages in the laboratory. One such 
that has been in common use is ‘time to first bite’ expressed in minutes. Another method 
makes use of the number of settlings or bites per minute and has been termed ‘the biting 
rate ‘. 
In tests carried out in nature these indices, determined on an untreated subject, give an 
indication of the number and biting urge of mosquitoes present at the time, usually a very 
variable factor depending upon climatic conditions, time of day and other factors. It gives, 
however, a basis for evaluating the degree of effectiveness of the preparations tested. 
Table 30. Frequency distribution of number of females settling in 
I 5 seconds exposure on the untreated arm 
Group 
A 
B Number settling and wheals in groups of 5 Total 
Number of c * , settlings 
Result observations O-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 or wheals 
Settlings 209 0 24 78 78 29 0 3390 
Wheals * 95 4 46 23 19 1 1 1046 
Settlings 74 1 11 26 19 18 - 1191 
Wheals 74 1 33 20 19 1 - 886 
* Relates only to feedings in this series for which wheals were recorded. 
Table 31. Number of females settling and leaving in a 
gorged condition in an exposure of 15 minutes 
Number of Time intervals 
females r h , 
Group used Result 15” 30” 60” 2’ 5’ 10 Totals 
A 100 On arm 8 10 38 50 67 67 - 
New settlings 8 2 28 26 23 2 89 
Left gorged - - - 14 38 22 74 
B 200 On arm 21 40 105 161 171 42 - 
New settlings 21 19 65 70 57 0 232 
Left gorged - - - 14 61 93 158 
479 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
In the case of cage experiments response to the untreated arm, provided the mosquitoes 
are in a suitable condition for use in testing, is very rapid and some modification of the 
above use of the test is necessary. For this purpose the author uses a preliminary short 
exposure of the untreated arm immediately before carrying out a test for repellency. The 
arm being inserted only for 15 seconds does not interfere with the adequacy of the test 
cage, the result serving to show that the mosquitoes are normal in their reaction. As this 
test has been carried out and the results recorded over a long period, a considerable mass of 
data has been accumulated in this respect serving to show how extremely rapid is the 
attacking reaction under such circumstances. In Table 30 is given the distribution of the 
number of females settling in exposures of the arm for 15 seconds tests. The area of arm 
exposed is 30 square inches, the cages those described as type B cages and the mosquitoes 
5-7 days from emergence kept in small type A cages at 25” C. and 70 per cent relative 
humidity until, shortly before the repellency test, they are transferred to the larger cage 
and exposed for 1 hour, without access to water, to illumination from an electric lamp. 
Each experimental cage contains mosquitoes hatched from 100 female and 100 male pupae. 
The data relate to two observers, A and B respectively. 
. The observations show under A that out of 209 tests from ten to twenty females settled 
in the 15 seconds in no less than 156 of these and that in a fair number of cases up to twenty- 
five had settled to feed in that short time. Under B a very similar result is shown. 
The table shows also the recorded number of wheals that followed on these exposures. 
Some interest attaches to these since the presence of a wheal had been found to show that a 
mosquito had remained at least some 6 seconds from the time of settling to puncture. From 
series B in which observations on wheal formation were recorded for all tests it will be seen 
that wheals formed only 74 per cent of settlings, those mosquitoes settling within less than 
6 seconds from termination of the test having probably not had time to puncture, or 
punctured long enough to leave a wheal. In this brief period of the preliminary test 4581 
settlings or 16.3 per cent are accounted for out of a possible total of 283 x 100 if all the 
28,300 females used had settled. 
In Table 3 1 are given the results of counts made by two observers each recording settlings 
and leaving in a gorged condition of mosquitoes on their side of a line down the middle of 
the exposed area of 30 square inches of skin with a time interval of 15 minutes. Some dis- 
crepancies are due to the difficulty of keeping accurate record under such conditions. Also 
a certain number of the mosquitoes, usually amounting to about 20 per cent, may leave 
the situation on which they have first alighted for the eventual feed. The table, however, 
gives a good idea of the settling rate as also for the time of engorgement and of leaving the 
arm in a gorged condition. Many, however, remain on the arm in a fully gorged condition, 
having withdrawn their mouth-parts for some considerable time unless disturbed. 
When the test is performed with a repellent, in place of almost immediate settling and 
gorging, the ‘time to first bite’ may be prolonged for hours in the case of a strong repellent. 
Where the repellent is one acting at a distance, mosquitoes usually remain resting on the 
roof or sides of the cage and make little or no attempt to feed. Substances that have little 
or no action at a distance may show the curious phenomenon that may be described as 
‘hopping’. The mosquitoes settle, but quickly leave, only again to alight and leave. 
Another frequent condition when the repellent is not too strong is for the mosquito to fly 
to the arm as if to alight but fail to do so and to leave the arm at a tangent. Under such 
circumstances, though they do not alight, a faint touch may be felt by the observer. 
480 
IMAGO: FOOD AND FEEDING 
REFERENCES 
ALTMAN, R. M. and SMITH, C. N. (1955). Investigation of repellents in protection against mos- 
quitoes in Alaska 1953. J. Econ. Ent. 48, 67-72. 
APPLETHWAITE, K. H. and CROSS, H. F. (1951). Further studies of repellents in Alaska. J. Econ. 
Ent. 44, 19-22. 
APPLETHWAITE, K. H. and SMITH, C. N. (1950). Field tests with mosquitoes and sandfly repellents 
in Alaska. J. Econ. Ent. 43, 353-7. 
ARAGAO, DE B. H. (1939). Mosquitoes and yellow fever virus. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 34,565-81. 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). Rep. Yell. Fev. Comm. (West Africa). Vol. III. London. 
BATES, M. (1949). The Natural History of Mosquitoes. Macmillan Co., New York. 
BISHOP, A. and GILCHRIST, B. M. (1946). Experiments upon the feeding of Agdes aegypti through 
animal membranes, etc. Parasitology, 37, 85-100. 
BONNE, C. and BONNE-WEPSTER, J. (1925). Mosquitoes of Surinam : a Study of Neotropical 
Mosquitoes. Kolonial Institute, Amsterdam. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BOYCE, R. (1907). Quoted by Howard, Dyar and Knab (1912). 
CARTER, H. R. (1904). Some characteristics of Stegomyia fasciata which affect its conveyance of 
yellow fever. Med. Rec. N. Y. 65, 761-6. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1945). Insect repellents. Brit. Med. Bull. 3. 222-4. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents: being a report of the work of the mosquito 
repellent enquiry, Cambridge 1943-5. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1922). Renseignements sur 1’Ai;des aegypti (Stegomyia). Mexico. Abstract in 
Bull. Of. Int. Hyg. Publ. 15, 506. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1924). Suggestions for developing a campaign to control yellow fever. Amer. J. 
Trop. Med. 4, 277-307. 
COSSIO, V. (1931). Observaciones sobre al Aedes aegypti, etc. Bol. Cons. Nat. Hig. Uruguay. 
Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 19, 230. 
CRUMB, S. E. (1922). A mosquito attractant. Science, 55, 446-7. 
DAVID, W. A. L., BRACEY, P. and HARVEY, A. (1944). Equipment and method employed in 
breeding Aedes aegypti in the biological assay of insecticides. Bull. Ent. Res. 35, 227-30. 
DAVIS, G. E. and PHILIP, C. B. (1931). The identification of the blood meal in West African 
mosquitoes by means of the precipitation test. Amer. J. Hyg. 14, 130-41. 
DETHIER, V. G. (1947). Chemical Insect Attractants and Repellents. H. K. Lewis and Co., London. 
DOANE, R. W. (1914). Disease-bearing insects in Samoa. Bull. Ent. Res. 4, 265-9. 
DRAKE-BROCKMAN, R. E. (1913). Some notes on Stegomyia fasciata in the coast towns of British 
Somaliland. J. Lond. Sch. Trop. Med. 2, 166-9. 
DURHAM, H. E. Quoted by Theobald, Mono. Cul. 3, 1903. 
DURHAM, H. E. and MYERS, W. (1902). Report of the yellow fever expedition to Para. Lpool 
Sch. Trop. Med. Mem. VII. 
DUTTON, J. E. (1903). Report of the malaria expedition to Gambia. Lpool Sch. Trop. Med. 
Mem. x. 
FIELDING, J. W. (1919). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata Fabr. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 13, 259-96. 
FINLAY, C. (1886). Yellow fever transmission by means of the Culex mosquito. Amer. J. Med. Sci. 
92, 395-409. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). OS mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Paris. 
GORDON, R. M. (1922a). The susceptibility of the individual to the bites of Stegomyia calopus. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 16, 229-34. 
GORDON, R. M. (1922 b). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia calopus Meig. in Brazil. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 16, 425-39. 
GORDON, R. M. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1939). A study of the behaviour of the mouth-parts of 
mosquitoes when taking up food from living tissues etc. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 33, 
259-78. 
31 481 CH 
REFERENCES 
GORDON, R. M. and YOUNG, C. J. (1921). The feeding habits of Stegomyia calopus Meig. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 15, 265-8. 
GUTZEVICH, A. V. (1931). The reproduction and development of the yellow fever mosquito under 
experimental conditions (in Russian). Msg. Parasit. Leningrad, 2, 35-54. Abstract in 
Rev. Appl. Ent. 21, 2. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1923). The yellow fever mosquito. U.S. Dep. Agric. Fmrs’ Bull. no. 1354. 
HOWARD, DYAR and KNAB. See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (1910). The influence of temperature upon the biting of mosquitoes. Para- 
sitology, 3, 479-84. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (1913). Stegomyia fasciata. Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Malar. Comm. Madras, 1912, 
p. 205. 
JAMES, S. P. and TATE, P. (1938). Exoerythrocytic schizogony in Plasmodium gallinaceum Brumpt. 
Parasitology, 30, 128-39. 
JOHNSON, H. A. (1937). Note on the continuous rearing of AZdes aegypti in the laboratory. 
Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 52, 1177-9. 
KING, W. V. (1951). Repellents and insecticides for use against insects of medical importance. 
J. Econ. Ent. 44, 338-43. 
KNIPLING, E. F. and DOVE, W. E. (1944). Recent investigations of insecticides and repellents for 
the armed forces. J. Econ. Ent. 37, 477-80. 
KUMM, H. W. (1932). Yellow fever transmission experiments with South American bats. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 26, 207-l 3. 
LANG, C. A. and WALLIS, R. C. (1956). An artificial feeding procedure for AZdes aegypti L. using 
sucrose. Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 5, 9 15-20. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1933). Observations upon Acdes aegypti L. (Diptera: Culicidae) under controlled 
atmospheric conditions. Bull. Ent. Res. 24, 363-72. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1947). Observations on the effect of micro-climate on the biting of AZdes 
aegypti (L.) (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Exp. Biol. 24, 361-73. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1957). The activity cycle of domestic AL;des (Stegomyia) aegypti (L.) (Dipt., 
Culicid.) in Southern Province, Tanganyika. Bull. Ent. Res. 48, 769-82. 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. and BERTRAM, D. S. (1940). Observations on the biology of Plasmodium 
gallinaceum Brumpt 1935 in the domestic fowl with special reference to the production of 
gametocytes and the development in Aedes aegypti. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 34, 135-60. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1915). Observations on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 6, 
205-29. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). See references inch. I (f), p. 19. 
MATHIS, M. (1934). Agressivite et ponte comparees du moustique de la fievre jaune en conditions 
experimentales. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 115, 1624-6. 
OTTO, M. and NEUMANN, R. 0. (1905). Studien tiber Gelbfieber in Brasilien. 2. Hyg. InfektKr. 
51, 357-506. 
PARKER, A. H. (1948). Stimuli involved in the attraction of Agdes aegypti L. to man. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 39, 387-97. 
PERYASSU, A. G. (1908). 0s Culicideos do Brazil. Leuzinger, Rio de Janeiro. 
REUTER, J. (1936). Orienteerend onderzoek naar de oorzaak van het gedrag van Anopheles maculi- 
pennis Meigen bij de voedselkeuze (summary in English). 118 pp. Proefschr, Rijksuniv, 
Leiden. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 24, 223. 
ROADHOUSE, L. A. 0. (1953). Laboratory studies on insect repellency. Canad. J. Zool. 31, 
535-46. 
RUDOLFS, W. (1922). Chemotropism of mosquitoes. N.J. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. no. 367. 
RUDOLFS, W. (1930). Effects of chemicals upon the behaviour of mosquitoes. N.J. Agric. Exp. 
Sta. Bull. no. 496. 
SARKARIA, D. S. and BROWN, A. W. A. (1951). Studies of the responses of the female Ak;des 
mosquito. Parts I and II. Bull. Ent. Res. 42, 115-22. 
SCHWETZ, J. (1915). Preliminary notes on the mosquitoes of Kabinda (Lomani), Belgian Congo. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 9, 163-8. 
482 
REFERENCES 
SEATON, D. R. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1941). Observations on the effect of age, fertilization and 
light on biting by AL;des aegypti (L.) in a controlled micro-climate. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 
35, 23-36. 
SEN, S. K. (1918). Beginnings in insect physiology and their economic significance. Agric. J. 
India, 13, 620-7. 
SILER, J. F., HALL, M. W. and HICHENS, A. D. (1926). Dengue: its history, epidemiology, 
mechanism of transmission, etc. Philipp. J. Sci. 29, l-304. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1903). See references in ch. I (e), p. 18. 
TRAVIS, B. V., MORTON, F. A., JONES, H. A. and ROBINSON, J. H. (1949). The most effective 
mosquito repellents tested at the Orlando Florida Laboratory 1942-7. J. Econ. Ent. 42, 
686-94. 
TRAVIS, B. V. and SMITH, C. N. (1951). Mosquito repellents selected for use on man. J. Econ. 
Ent. 44,428-g. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1935). Onderzoekingen omtrent den gedrag van Anopheles ten opzichte van 
Mensch, etc. Geneesk. Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind. 75, 2101-18. 
WILLIS, E. R. (1947). The olfactory response of female mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 40, 769-78. 
WOKE, P. A. (1937a). Cold-blooded vertebrates as hosts for Agdes aegypti Linn. J. Parasit. 23, 
310-13. 
WOKE, P. A. (1937b). Comparative effects of the blood of different species of vertebrates on egg 
production of AZdes aegypti Linn. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 17,729-45. See also further references 
given under ch. XXII. 
483 31-z 
XXI 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
(a) DESCRIPTION OF THE ACT OF FEEDING 
Few biting insects are more apparently intelligent, cunning and cautious than AL;des 
aegypti in its behaviour when attacking. It rarely attacks blindly as some mosquitoes do or 
makes a frontal attack. Usually it approaches from the shady side and from behind, and it 
is difficult to get the attacking insect plainly visible against a suitable background. Com- 
monly after failure to achieve its object at a first trial it makes a renewed attack from a 
quarter different to that which is engaging the victim’s attention. Its approach is silent. 
According to Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) a good description of the stealthy attack has 
been given by Parker, Beyer and Pothier (1903). The male, though it does not bite, behaves 
very much as the female, hovering and darting about the seemingly intended victim ap- 
parently without any object, since it rarely settles. Only under one condition does the 
female mosquito appear to disregard all caution, namely when it has been interrupted in 
the act of feeding. It may then literally precipitate itself upon the victim regardless of 
consequences. 
On alighting on the skin it quickly punctures, usually if hungry without hesitation and 
at the spot at which it first alights. In a certain proportion of cases more than one puncture 
is made, though normally the insect does not easily leave the first-selected site and if blood 
is not tapped within the first minute it will often remain several minutes until it is ulti- 
mately successful. On the other hand, it may after a time withdraw its mouth-parts and 
make one or more further punctures. Gorging is complete with the majority of insects in 
good condition within from 2 to 5 minutes. Evidence of puncture in the normal subject is 
given by the subsequent appearance of a wheal. 
A number of authors have described with various degrees of detail the act of feeding, 
a good general description for Culex being given by Reaumur as early as 1738. The fol- 
lowing is a description of the act as it can be seen by the naked eye or under a lens. 
The insect alights, folds its wings and takes up a position much as when resting. The tip 
of the proboscis is then naturally close to the skin at a point roughly central to the four 
points of support provided by the fore- and mid-legs. If strong and hungry the insect 
straightens its fore-legs and raises the front part of its body to bring the proboscis into a 
more vertical position before sinking it in the tissues. In many cases, however, the mosquito 
simply remains as if resting until it is seen that the labium is buckling and the mouth-parts 
evidently sinking in. As the mouth-parts sink in, their direction usually, however, becomes 
more vertical. At first the hind-legs may be held, as they commonly are at rest, in the air 
giving no support to the body. But with commencing penetration the hind tarsi are brought 
down on to the skin. The femoro-tibia1 angles of all the legs are made more acute and the 
tarsi are drawn in and brought flat on the skin. In other words the insect appears to settle 
to work and take a grip, a fact supporting the contention of Robinson (1939) that the force 
for initial penetration of the epidermis is supplied from the legs through the neck (see 
484 
THE ACT OF FEEDING 
section (b) on mechanism of feeding). It is this drawing in of the legs which gives the feeding 
insect its characteristic crouched appearance. 
Usually without any sign of effort the mouth-parts appear to sink into the skin, whilst the 
ensheathing proboscis buckles to allow of this. Though the palps may be raised, the act is 
not conspicuous as with the long palps of Anopheles and usually they appear much as 
when at rest. During sinking of the mouth-parts, however, they exhibit a distinct tremor as 
described by MacGregor (1930), due to the action of the maxillary muscles. A similar 
tremor is often seen on withdrawing the parts. It soon becomes evident, especially in a 
lateral view, that the labium has bent sufficiently to expose some length of fascicle which is 
forced out of the groove it normally occupies. Bending of the labium, as it buckles more 
and more, is mainly at a point at the junction of the basal with the middle third of the 
organ. The bending at this point is quite sharp and becomes sharper as penetration of the 
fascicle progresses. When the fascicle has penetrated to about half its length blood may 
begin to enter as is shown by the sudden appearance of a bright red streak in the fascicle. 
The labium now has the appearance of being sharply bent, the basal third sloping down- 
wards to the bend and the distal two-thirds passing to the site of puncture. Sometimes the 
distal third remains approximated to the fascicle, at others the labium retains its hold only 
at the extreme end, being bent like a bow with a kink where it is more sharply bent. With 
deeper penetration the kink in the labium from being an angular bend becomes like the 
bend in a hairpin, the basal third of the labium being brought into apposition eventually 
with the middle third should the fascicle be sunk to its full depth. By this time the bent 
labium has become directed backwards and upwards into the hollow between the head and 
prothorax. The head is depressed in such a position that the occiput viewed from above 
only just shows in front of the anterior promontory of the thorax. Sometimes after being 
sunk more deeply the fascicle is somewhat withdrawn or it may be moved up and down 
several times. 
At some stage a bright red streak of blood suddenly appears in the fascicle and following 
upon this the abdomen slowly swells; at first rather slowly, later more rapidly. The insect 
now remains passive as the abdomen enlarges more and more. As it does so it ceases to 
remain parallel to the wings as in the unfed condition and sags away from these which no 
longer suffice to cover it. As engorgement proceeds the cerci are extruded and a drop of 
clear fluid is shot out on to the skin. This may be repeated several times. 
As full engorgement approaches the abdominal pleurae are greatly stretched so that they 
become at least as extensive as the scaled portions. The membrane of the intersegmental 
areas is also stretched out and exposed so that these and the pleurae as far down as the 
fifth abdominal segment show up bright red from the ingested blood. Unless there is some 
delay in striking blood, completion of gorging usually takes from 2 to 3 minutes. Often 
once started it is completed within a minute. 
If undisturbed, the insect now remains for some little time with the fascicle lying in the 
tissues apparently no longer engaged in conveying blood. Then the fascicle is withdrawn. 
Before this is done it may be partially withdrawn and resunk, often several times, 
seeming to slide up and down with no effort, as though in a bore hole. Final withdrawal, 
however, is often accompanied with considerable effort, and a marked tremor of the head 
may occur and be transmitted to the palpi and even the antennae. Or the fascicle may be 
withdrawn unobtrusively and the proboscis observed to be now no longer active but just 
resting on or near the skin. 
485 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
Having completed gorging, the insect, unless disturbed, does not leave its position but 
remains at rest with its proboscis laid along or near the skin for as much as 15 minutes or 
more, though disturbance causes it at once to fly away, or as described by MacGregor 
(1915) hop away, for it now flies with difficulty and rapidly comes to rest if only on the 
floor of the cage. 
Having found a suitable place nearby to settle the insect now remains quiet, and if in a 
tube with damp filter paper it will remain for days resting towards the top of the strip or 
on the netting covering the tube until oviposition approaches. 
A very curious phenomenon is commonly seen shortly after the fascicle has been with- 
drawn, namely a strange writhing movement of the proboscis. This has been described by 
MacGregor as vibratory, but the movement is more like a man settling his arm in a sleeve, 
and the appearance is obviously the insect settling the fascicle again satisfactorily in its 
sheath. What makes it so surprising to watch is that the proboscis, which one is apt to 
look upon as a more or less rigid, or at least inert, organ literally squirms, there being no 
doubt, watching it, that intrinsic muscles must be concerned (see under ‘Muscles of 
the labium’, p. 585). 
Another striking feature of feeding is that the insect, once it has begun to suck blood, 
appears to become oblivious of all danger and considerable physical force is required to 
make it give up its hold. Moreover, even when dislodged, it will often refuse to leave the 
spot and in spite of being pushed about will endeavour to bite again. This feature is 
referred to by Gordon and Lumsden (1939) when they note that they were only able to get 
A. aegypti to feed on the frog’s foot by employing mosquitoes which had been allowed to 
start feeding on the human arm. When nearing repletion, however, the insect usually leaves 
readily if disturbed. 
(b) MECHANISM OF FEEDING 
The mechanism of feeding has been very thoroughly worked out by MacGregor (193 l), 
Robinson (1939) and Gordon and Lumsden (1939) (see also Griffiths and Gordon, 1952). 
A number of points have been further clarified by the work of Bishop and Gilchrist (1944, 
1946). It is interesting to note that the bending back of the labium was observed by Finlay 
as far back as 1886. He says that in the case of man the stylets penetrate Q-2 mm. before a 
blood vessel of sufficient calibre is met with. He gives l-7 minutes for completion of the act. 
MacGregor, following up the observation of Hertig and Hertig (1927) and of Kadletz 
and Kusmina (1929) that mosquitoes can be fed artificially with a capillary tube, detached 
altogether the fascicle from the labium before the operation and was thus enabled to study 
the induced automatic imbibition of fluid. He described two methods of feeding-the 
continuous and the discontinuous. When feeding on blood in the normal way the insect 
used the continuous method and the blood passed into the mid-gut. Fluids such as sugar 
mixed with blood are taken in by discontinuous aspiration and pass into the diverticula. 
When blood sucking is interrupted, any fluid left in the proboscis is diverted to the diverti- 
cula. These organs according to the author act not only as food reservoirs for fluids other 
than blood, but also as air separation chambers against airlocks. 
Robinson (1939) has further followed the mechanism of feeding and has described very 
fully the action of the different mouth structures in this process. For the details of the very 
complete exposition the original paper should be consulted. Briefly the initial maxillary 
486 
MECHANISM OF FEEDING 
thrust is due to the contraction of the maxillary protractor muscle. The maxillary galeae 
(maxillae of authors), being thus bent by impact with the skin, tend to bend and separate 
from the labrum and other stylets, but are held in place by surface tension and so are forced 
into the tissues. Penetration of the fascicle is thus begun. Two phases in penetration are to 
be distinguished, namely puncturing the epidermis and penetration into the dermis. 
During the initial thrust Robinson considers that the thrusting force is exerted on the 
thorax by the clinging action of the legs. This is transmitted through the neck to the head 
and steadies the area of origin of the maxillary protractor muscles. The author notes that 
though the neck is membranous it may act in this way by reason of turgidity caused by blood 
pressure. The neck, however, is provided through the cervical sclerites with broad chitinous 
plates passing from articulation with the prothorax to the occipital portion of the head, 
which should assist in giving the necessary support. There seems no doubt from the stance 
of the insect when commencing to puncture that the legs are important in providing at least 
a fulcrum for action (see under description of the act of feeding). Later by alternate 
forward movements of the maxillae, using anchorage of the opposite maxilla for purchase, 
the maxillae in rapid rhythmical movement literally draw the fascicle into the tissues 
through the pull of the maxillary retractor muscles. Eventually the fascicle is sunk often for 
nearly its full length into the tissues. 
The third stage, which follows when blood has been tapped, is one of passivity, the move- 
ments of the mouth-parts ceasing and the insect sitting passively on the skin until engorge- 
ment is completed. Engorgement, once blood has begun to flow, is very rapid, seeing how 
fine is the capillary blood channel through which the blood has to pass. The channel is 
about 2 mm. long and has a diameter of about 0.03 mm. Through it commonly in 2 minutes 
passes from’2 to 4 c.mm. of blood. The volume of the channel space from the above data 
works out as OXKI14 cmm. To pass the volume of blood given it would therefore have to 
be filled from 1430 to 2860 times in 120 seconds, which would give the rate of flow as 
from 2 to 4 centimetres per second. 
During withdrawal of the mouth-parts movements of the maxillae again take place, 
usually assisted to a greater or less extent by traction exerted by the legs transmitted 
through the neck and head. 
Gordon and Lumsden (1939) observed the feeding of A. aegypti in the web of the frog’s 
foot viewed from behind. The first sign of intention to feed was the repeated application of 
the tip of the labium to the skin, the palps being often raised during the process. The 
labella were always kept pressed close together as described by Robinson and not separated 
as has been stated by Vogel (1921) and other authors. Before the skin was pierced by the 
fascicle the labium ceased to wander and remained stationary for several seconds at the 
selected spot. The labella seen through the web appeared as a dark circular spot from the 
centre of which the fascicle was protruded. At this stage an oscillatory movement was seen 
for a few seconds presumably due to cutting of the superficial layers of the skin by the 
galeae of the maxillae, followed by appearance of the sharp point of the labrum, on each 
side of which could be seen the rapidly moving galeae. The fascicle penetrating the tissues 
did so in a purposive manner. The tip was actively bent and the flexible remainder followed. 
When blood was taken from an extravasation into the tissues from an injured vessel, feeding 
might take ten minutes for completion (pool feeding). When occurring as a result of the 
fascicle entering the lumen of a capillary, full engorgement took only 3 minutes (capillary 
feeding). 
487 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
These observations by Gordon and Lumsden were made on the transparent web of the 
frog’s foot, In 1952 Griffiths and Gordon describe an apparatus (see also Griffiths and 
Gordon, 195 1) which enables the process of feeding to be observed in the tissues of a live 
rodent. By this apparatus microscopic observation can be carried out by transillumination 
of the ear of an anaesthetised laboratory white mouse. Here as in the web of the frog the 
remarkable movements of the fascicle can be followed. The authors note that the fascicle 
enters the skin at right angles to the surface and may sometimes continue in such a direc- 
tion. Usually, however, immediately after penetrating, it bends nearly at right angles and 
then proceeds to tunnel through the tissues parallel to the skin surface. Usually before the 
fascicle becomes fully extended the tip of the labium is seen to bend sharply and the 
forward movement is continued in a new direction. The authors comment upon the rapidity 
and apparent ease with which the fascicle penetrates and the effortless manner in which it 
alters its direction almost as if moving in a liquid. The shaft, however, shows that there is 
complete absence of lateral movement and the curvature assumed by the fascicle is de- 
pendent on its adaptation to the tunnel cut by the galeae. During the process of searching 
for blood, discharges of clear fluid, evidently salivary secretion, take place from time to 
time. As in the web of the frog’s foot blood may be obtained by pool feeding from an 
extravasation or from a capillary. In the case of capillary feeding the fascicle may pass some 
distance along the capillary lumen. A peculiar feature in the latter case is the common 
occurrence of a pulsation possibly due to suction, collapse of the vessel wall and an 
increased velocity imparted to the contained red cells. 
(c) THE GORGED INSECT 
Immediately after feeding the abdomen is enormously swollen, measuring in a fully gorged 
female up to over 4-O mm. in length and nearly 2.0 mm. in greatest breadth. The wings 
which when folded formerly completely covered and reached to about the end of the 
abdomen now only partially cover the enlarged mass which extends beyond them for a 
third of its length as well as laterally beyond their borders. Occupying the greater part of 
the mass is the enormously swollen mid-gut extending posteriorly, as shown by its vivid red 
colour shining through the membranous pleurae, to the posterior border of the fifth 
abdominal segment. Formerly entirely hidden or indicated only as a line of meeting of the 
tergites and sternites the pleurae now form extensive areas on either side of greatly 
stretched thin membrane, under which can be seen by the binocular thin white lines formed 
by stretched tracheal vessels and posteriorly some coils of Malpighian tubules shown up on 
the red background. The intersegmental membrane between the tergites and that between the 
sternites are similarly stretched so that these structures are widely separated by membrane. 
Anteriorly at the base of the abdomen and occupying the first abdominal segment can be 
seen a pale area where the end of the ventral diverticulum extends into the abdomen. Here 
the sternite is represented only by thin membrane, and the characteristic bubbles of the 
diverticulum can be seen shining through. 
Compressed into the sixth segment and distending this are now all the organs of the 
abdomen other than the mid-gut. The seventh segment (the last except for the small eighth 
normally retracted within the seventh for most of its extent) has only narrow pleurae and 
is not distended, the tergite and sternite remaining in contact. Beyond the cuff-like seventh 
488 
THE GORGED INSECT 
segment in the anaesthetised or moribund insect there projects in constant uneasy movement 
part of the tiny eighth segment with the cerci. 
During engorgement there is projected from time to time from the anus a tiny drop of 
clear fluid. These drops have commonly been assumed to be plasma or serum exuded 
from the blood mass in the gut (for example, Bonne-Wepster and Brug, 1932), in support 
of which view was held to be the fact noted by Fulleborn (1908) that he found the haemo- 
globin content much higher in the blood from the gut than in normal human blood. 
Allowed to dry on a slide such drops show crystals and give exactly the appearance shown 
by small evaporated drops of normal saline. They do not coagulate on heating or give the 
Millon reaction. Diluted they give a copious precipitate with AgNO,. From the work of 
Wigglesworth on excretion in insects (Wigglesworth, 1942) it is clear that these droplets 
are urine secreted by the Malphighian tubules and not directly derived from the ingested 
blood. Very often after some time, droplets left on the glass of tubes in which fed mosquitoes 
have been confined for oviposition show a white deposit at the bottom of the drop, 
which under the microscope is seen to consist of the characteristic globular crystals of 
urates. Passage of such droplets is not confined to the time when the insect is engorging 
but continues copiously for some time after. 
Dissection of the freshly gorged insect shows a mass of partially clotted blood distending 
the bag-like mid-gut, the walls of which are now so thin and delicate that they are ruptured 
at the least touch. The contained blood has a rather tarry consistence, but is not at this stage 
apparently haemolysed, since mixed with normal saline the fluid is not coloured and the 
red cells are still largely intact. The ovaries are tiny organs measuring about a millimetre 
when not stretched out and composed of follicles in an early stage of development. The 
ventral diverticulum forms a large saccular organ with bubbles and measuring 3-4 mm. in 
length and about 2 mm. broad when flattened by its own weight. 
(d) THE FUNCTIONS OF THE DIVERTICULA 
These organs in the mosquito were observed as long ago as 1851 by Dufour. As in other 
mosquitoes those of A. aegypti are three in number, namely two quite small dorsal and one 
large ventral, all arising from the thin-walled dilated oesophagus in front of the proventri- 
culus. Normally these delicate thin-walled structures contain at least some air bubbles, and 
the large ventral diverticulum may be distended by a mass of such. The diverticula may also 
contain fluid, especially after feeding on certain substances such as sugary fluids or in 
moribund mosquitoes that have become entangled with the water surface. These very 
commonly swallow water and air until the ventral diverticulum becomes enormously dis- 
tended. Even as a normal result of engorgement and digestion, as the gut is reduced in size 
and with oviposition the ovaries are emptied, the ventral diverticulum comes to occupy a 
large part of the abdomen, extending to segment 3 or 4 or beyond. 
The functions of the diverticula were not at first very evident and considerably divergent 
views on the subject have been given. That when mosquitoes are fed on sugary fluids these, 
unlike blood, pass, not into the mid-gut, but into the diverticula was first shown by Nuttall 
and Shipley (1903), and is now generally accepted. Also the result of the observations by 
Wright (1924), Kadletz and Kusmina (1929), MacGregor (1930, 193 I), Bishop and Gil- 
Christ (1944), and more recently of Trembley (1952) and of Day (1954), has been to establish 
489 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
that when the mosquito feeds normally on blood this passes direct to the mid-gut. Whether 
blood is ever taken into the diverticula is less certain and recorded findings in this respect are 
sometimes conflicting. Roy (1927) states that when the mid-gut is full, blood may be passed 
into the diverticulum. This, however, is against usual experience. Fifty females were 
allowed to gorge for 5 minutes and killed and examined within a further 3 minutes. All stages 
of gorging were found including many that had gorged and left the arm. In none was 
blood found in the diverticulum and in all fully gorged specimens the clear space at the 
base of the abdomen occupied by the air-filled ventral diverticulum was evident to external 
examination. 
MacGregor (1930, 193 I), however, found that when fed artificially by the method of 
Kadletz and Kasmina (1929) with blood mixed with honey the fluid passed almost entirely 
to the diverticula, if fully fed both to the dorsal and ventral diverticula, otherwise to the 
ventral diverticulum. In normal feeding blood passed directly to the mid-gut, but with 
interrupted feeds it may go to the diverticula. 
Bishop and Gilchrist (1944, 1946) have studied the imbibition of different fluids in the 
case of mosquitoes fed through an animal membrane and directly from open drops. In 
these experiments it was found that whole blood and red blood corpuscles in saline, when 
ingested through a membrane, go directly into the mid-gut which becomes fully distended. 
Haemoglobin in plasma or distilled water is ingested to a lesser degree and, in feeding 
through a membrane, plasma alone rarely. But if they are ingested these pass to the mid-gut. 
Solutions containing glucose or honey are seldom imbibed through a membrane. But if they 
are, they pass to the mid-gut or diverticula, only the diverticula, however, being distended. 
Feeding from an open drop, blood is rarely ingested, but if it is it passes to the mid- 
gut. Haemoglobin in plasma or water is rarely ingested, but if it is it passes to the mid-gut. 
Solutions containing glucose or honey are readily ingested and pass mainly to the diverti- 
cula which become fully distended, though traces may be found in the mid-gut. In this 
last respect it may be recalled that it was noted by MacGregor (1930) that traces of fluid 
when the diverticula are full may pass into the mid-gut, the point at which they do so 
being shown, if formalin be added to the fluid, by immediate death of the insect. Sum- 
marising, Bishop and Gilchrist conclude that it is the nature of the food, not the method of 
feeding, which determines its destination. 
Day (1954), who found that sugars are diverted to the diverticula and blood to the mid- 
gut, suggests that such discrimination is carried out by reason of the sensory papillae of 
the buccal cavity (see description of the buccal cavity given in ch. XXVI, p. 571 and description 
of the sensory papillae in ch. XXIX, p. 664) transmitting impulses through the stomogastric 
system causing relaxation of the cardiac sphincter in the case of blood and of sphincter 
fibres at the neck of the ventral diverticulum for sugar. 
Wright (1924) suggests that the diverticula in Diptera were originally food reservoirs, 
this function being largely suspended in the case of blood-sucking females. To act as storage 
receptacles for certain forms of food is not, however, the only function these curious thin- 
walled yet muscular organs appear to serve. Mention has been made of the fact that in the 
act of engorgement the ventral diverticulum passes well into the abdomen. It seems very 
possible that this is a protective device. The newly gorged insect with an amount of blood 
that may be equal to or even greater than its own weight is in a position where trauma 
may readily occur. When, too, as digestion proceeds and the gut shrinks and eventually the 
ovaries are emptied, the ventral diverticulum comes to occupy a large part of the abdomen. 
490 
THE DIVERTICULA 
Thus it appears to play the part of an adjustable air cushion in the abdomen that might well 
be purposive in effect. 
Even the small dorsal diverticula may not be without some function. These lie in a very 
narrow space between the massive dorso-ventral wing muscles of the two sides and are 
further restricted by the anterior-posterior wing muscles above and the thoracic ganglia 
below. It is possible, therefore, that some cushioning may here also be present. 
Wright, commenting on the view that the diverticula may act in a fashion to lighten the 
body for flying, turns such a view down since the diverticula being filled with air cannot 
lighten the body. They might, however, increase the ratio of resistance to the air and weight 
in the same way that birds possess air cavities in the bones. 
Reference has been made to males and females found lying moribund on the water with 
their diverticula swollen with fluid. It would appear that the insects are unable to prevent 
fluid passing up the blood channel as a purely mechanical process or that some form of 
sucking action by the moribund insect leads to this result. The cause of the condition which 
is very commonly seen is not known. 
(e) SALIVARY GLAND SECRETION 
A number of observations have been made on the salivary glands of mosquitoes and their 
secretion. The first to describe the glands appears to have been Macloskie (1887). Since then 
they have been further described, especially as regards the glands of Anopheles, by many 
authors.* The glands consist on each side of three acini, two lateral and one median, the 
lateral acini in the body lying one above and one below the median. In Anopheles the 
median acinus is shorter and more saccular than the lateral acini and differs from these in 
appearance. In Culex and Ak;des the difference is little marked (Fig. 66 (6)). Like the glands 
of Culex the central duct of each acinus in A?des aegypti is not enlarged towards the end 
of the acinus but remains uniformly narrow to its termination. According to Metcalf 
(1945) the intra-acinar salivary ducts are lined with chitin. Compared with the large glands 
of Anopheles those of AFdes aegypti are small. The most recent method of dissection of the 
glands is described by Shute (1940). 
The nature of the salivary secretion differs in different species. Nuttall and Shipley 
(1903), experimenting with an emulsion of the glands of Culex pipiens, found that this did 
not prevent the clotting of human blood. Cornwall and Patton (1914), trying the action on 
blood of an emulsion of the salivary glands of two species of Anopheles (A. rossi and 
A. jamesi-probably A. subpictus or A. vagus and A. annularis), found that these gave 
strong and immediate agglutination and that the blood failed to clot. A very complete 
study was made by Yorke and Macfie (1924) of the salivary secretion of Anopheles maculi- 
pennis, Culex pipiens, Theobaldia annulata and At?des aegypti. With Anopheles glands they 
obtained complete and immediate agglutination. With Culex, Theobaldia and AL;des 
aegypti there was no trace of agglutination against human blood or that of a number of 
animals. In no case was there haemolysis, but in Anopheles there was a definite anti- 
coagulation effect on human blood. The glands of A. aegypti gave neither agglutination 
nor anti-coagulation effect. Two hours after feeding, the blood in the mid-gut of Anopheles 
was agglutinated and unclotted. In Ai;des aegypti it was coagulated and not agglutinated. 
Shute (1935) found that broken up in saline, citrate or defibrinated blood the glands of 
* Christophers (1901), Grassi (1901), Nuttall and Shipley (1903), Goldi (1913), Perfilev (1930), Shute (1940) 
and others. 
491 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
A. maculipennis (vars. atroparvus, messeae and type form) caused agglutination of the red 
cells of man and of most animals and birds tested. The male glands did not agglutinate, nor 
did the glands of A. claviger (bifurcatus), A. plumbeus, Culex pipiens, C. fatigans, several 
species of Ai;des, including Aedes aegypti, Theobaldia annulata or Taeniorrhynchus richiardii. 
Later (1948) he found that the glands of A. stephensi did not agglutinate. Due to the aggluti- 
nating action of the salivary secretion in A. maculipennis, oocysts in infected specimens tend 
to be congregated in the posterior portion of the gut. If, however, the mosquitoes be kept 
head downwards for 24 hours after the feed, the oocysts are in the anterior portion of the 
mid-gut. In A. stephensi, the salivary secretion of which does not agglutinate, the oocysts 
are scattered over the gut. 
Metcalf (1945) in A. maculipennis found the pH of the median acinus to be 6.87.0, whilst 
that of the lateral acini was 6.0-6.2. Agglutination was caused by the median acinus only. 
Tests for amylase, protease and lipase were negative. Both lateral and median acini, but 
especially the latter, contained a thermostable anti-coagulin; the median acinus also con- 
tained a thermolabile agglutinin, lacking or in very small amount in the lateral acini. 
Blood in the stomach of Agdes aegypti was coagulated but not agglutinated 15 minutes 
after a feed. 
Gordon and Lumsden (1939) allowed A. aegypti to bite for interrupted periods of 
10 seconds and found the reaction to the tenth bite as marked as that following the first. 
Since Boyd and Kitchen (1939) found sporozoites in the tissues in the neighbourhood of 
the bite they consider it probable that injection of the salivary secretion takes place into 
the tissues and not into the blood stream. This has since been observed to take place by 
Griffiths and Gordon (195 1) (see section b). 
(f) AMOUNT OF BLOOD TAKEN 
Fulleborn (1908) gave the blood taken by a gorged female A. aegypti as 1.1 mg. Bonne- 
Wepster and Brug state that this is probably too small. Darling (1910) weighed Anopheles 
albimanus bred in the laboratory 24 hours old with the mid-gut empty and with a moderate 
blood feed, the weight being respectively 08 and 1.6 mg., evidently a very small mosquito, 
but taking its own weight of blood. Caught specimens with much blood in the gut but 
undeveloped ova weighed 1.8 and 2.1 mg. With some blood in the gut and half-developed 
ovaries the weight was 1.9 mg. and with much blood and developed ovaries 3.5 mg. Taking 
the specific gravity as 1.050 he calculated that the volume of blood was 0.76 cmm. 
A considerable number of observations on the weight of blood taken by Aedes aegypti 
have been given by Roy (1936) in his work on the relation of the blood meal to development 
of the ovaries. The weight of a 3-day-old A. aegypti as determined on 137 mosquitoes before 
and after a blood meal in mg. was as follows. 
Mean Maximum Minimum 
Unfed females l-32 2-32 0.86 
Same fed 2.07 3.16 1.06 
Amount of blood taken 0.75 O-84 0.20 
He also gives a detailed statement of the mean weight of blood taken by mosquitoes of 
different weight. The majority weighed 1.34 mg. and took as blood meals a mean of 
under 2 mg. On the average the mosquitoes took a blood feed less than their own weight, 
but 53 out of 137 took one greater than their own weight. 
In the present author’s material the mosquitoes were evidently larger, as also the amount 
492 
AMOUNT OF BLOOD TAKEN 
of blood taken, but about the same proportion of weight of mosquito to blood taken holds 
good as in the fifty-three more active feeders in Roy’s series as shown in Table 32. 
In the series given in the table the mosquitoes were weighed immediately following the 
feed, that is as soon as they could be anaesthetised and placed in the weighing bottle. In 
every case all the fed mosquitoes in the cage were taken. The operation served to show that 
the passing of drops of fluid during and after feeding was by no means restricted to the 
few drops seen when the mosquito was actually feeding, as during weighing droplets of this 
fluid were always found covering the glass of the weighing bottle and in one sample weighed 
the weight of fluid amounted to O-1 mg. per mosquito. The control unfed mosquitoes were 
from parallel series reared under identical conditions to those fed. It is clear, therefore, 
that a fifth-day A. aegypti female when fully gorging takes more than its own weight of 
blood and may take nearly twice this. 
Table 32. Weight of mosquitoes and of blood taken 
Age 
Date d& 
16. viii. 46 0 
16. viii. 46 0 
11. vii. 46 1 
11. vii. 46 1 
19. viii. 46 4 
5. vi. 46 5 Degree 
of 
gorging 
Full 
Partial 
Full 
Full 
Full 
Full Number 
fed 
28 
13 
90 
90 
84 
159 Mean 
weight 
fed 
5.07 
3.43 
5.57 
5.58 
5.80 
6.35 Control 
unfed 
2.31 
2.31 
2.20 
2.20 
2.67 
2.14 Weight of 
blood 
taken 
2.66 
1.12 
3.27 
3.48 
3.13 
4.21 Proportion, 
weight of 
blood to 
that of 
mosquito 
1.13 
0.48 
l-49 
1.58 
1.17 
1.97 
(g) RATE OF DIGESTION 
The blood meal is very rapidly digested. Some of the fluid of the ingested blood is absorbed 
and evacuated during and shortly after the feed in the shape of droplets of clear urine. The 
weight of such droplets is quite considerable. Those left on a weighing bottle after weighing 
a number of recently fed females weighed about 0.1 mg. per mosquito. An equal amount or 
more is probably evacuated during the feed, and copious secretion of urine continues for 
some time after. 
By the second or third day a considerable amount of brown faeces is passed and the 
mosquito has already lost much of its gorged appearance and much of its extra weight.* 
Nine mosquitoes on the second day after engorgement gave a weight of only 2.33 mg. mean 
weight which is about the weight of the newly emerged mosquito. After 48 hours at 25” C. 
the gut usually still contains a much reduced quantity of altered blood, but this disappears 
by about 52 hours from the feed. The mid-gut is always completely free from all trace of 
blood before oviposition occurs. During this time in addition to the dark faeces there are to 
be seen on the tube in which the mosquito is confined droplets containing white deposit. 
This deposit commonly settles to the bottom of the drop leaving clear fluid above. Under 
the microscope characteristic ball-shaped crystals of urates are seen. 
For further information on digestion and changes following a blood meal see under 
‘Digestion’, ch. XXXI, p. 707. 
* Gillett (1956) has recently shown that elimination of the blood meal by defaecation usually occurs from 28 to 
32 hours after feeding in mosquitoes which develop oocysts to stage 3 only, whereas elimination of the blood meal 
is delayed for a further 7-10 hours in mosquitoes which develop oocysts to maturity. 
493 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
(h) BEHAVIOUR OF MALES DURING THE BLOOD FEED 
When offering the arm to a cage containing several hundred females and a like quantity of 
males the former have for the greater part settled on the skin and are actively engorging 
within some 2 minutes. The males do not settle at this time, or only an occasional one does 
so. The males, however, become extremely active, flying in a dancing-like fashion to and 
fro, backwards and forwards and sideways in an irregular lurching manner. The most 
conspicuous movement is backwards and forwards flight at an angle of about 30” to the 
horizontal through a distance seemingly of some 4 or 5 inches, reversing without turning 
the direction of the body. When glimpsed in this flight the insect’s body appears to be held 
at a slope from head to tip of abdomen of about 30” to the horizontal, that is much the 
same as the angle of flight. Whilst thus flying they give rise to a shrill humming noise. 
This activity is kept up almost indefinitely so long as the arm is present and even when the 
majority of the females have left. When the arm is withdrawn the dance ceases. When 
after some 15 minutes many females have left the arm the males often settle on the skin 
and walk about on this. They may be seen applying their proboscis tip with the long palpi 
to the skin, possibly taking up sweat or fluid voided by the females when feeding. 
Flight of the males, though it appears continuous, seems to be taken up in relays, there 
being always a number of males settled on the roof of the cage, but on watching the 
individuals they remain resting only for a time; others on the contrary are settling to rest. 
The excitement does not seem to be especially associated with copulation and there is no 
conspicuous appearance of females entering the crowd as described for swarms in the open. 
A certain number of males do, however, when on the arm solicit females who are still 
sucking, but are usually rebuffed. 
(i) REACTION FOLLOWING BITES 
Where there is nothing to cause interference with feeding A. aegypti for the most part 
completes gorging where it first alights and without making any second puncture. Gordon 
(1922) makes the observation that unless disturbed A. aegypti never bit twice. A certain 
proportion, however, even if not disturbed, do puncture more than once. Usually the total 
number of wheals after a large feed is about 25 per cent in excess of the number biting. In 
Table 33 are given examples where counts have been made. In all cases the temperature at 
which feeds were made was 25” C. and the exposure 15 minutes. Care was taken that no 
movement of the arm or other disturbing factor was present. 
It might seem that the results here given, showing an excess of wheals over the number of 
mosquitoes, were in contradiction to previous results given where the reverse was shown. 
Table 33. Number of wheals following feeds by mosquitoes 
Age in Number 
Date days fed 
16. viii. 46 0 41 
11. vii. 46 1 92 
17. viii. 46 1 82 
19. viii. 46 3 84 
13. iii. 46 6 84 
Total 383 Proportion 
Number of wheals to 
of wheals mosquitoes 
47 l-14 
105 l-14 
102 l-24 
111 1.32 
111 1.32 
476 l-24 
494 
REACTION FOLLOWING BITES 
The difference, however, is owing to the fact that in the test for biting rate only 15 seconds 
was allowed for the biting, whereas the present figures relate to conditions where the 
mosquitoes were given full time to complete their feeding. 
As already noted it is necessary before a wheal is produced on a susceptible individual 
for a certain time to elapse from the first commencing to puncture. This appears to be 
about 6 seconds. Bites in which the mosquito has left under 6 seconds in the individuals 
under observation have not usually left a wheal. The size of the wheal. other things being 
equal, is proportional to some extent to the time taken in the feed. Thus bites of short 
duration in which the insect is disturbed or prevented from remaining due to presence of 
a repellent may be very small, whilst a full-time bite gives a good wheal. A certain time is 
taken before the wheal develops. This may be from 5 to 15 minutes depending upon the 
individual and other circumstances. After expiry of this time a tingling sensation is felt 
and an urticarial-like wheal appears as a small discrete papule. The tingling felt is distinct 
from that due to the action of the mouth-parts in puncturing, which may or may not be 
felt at the time of the bite. The papule increases in size with typical urticarial appearance 
and may reach a centimetre or more in diameter. In some individuals the wheal is more 
diffuse, forming a soft indefinite swelling. This urticarial wheal usually subsides after an 
hour or so. What has been described may be called the ‘initial reaction ‘. At some later 
time, usually 12-24 hours, a more diffuse type of papule develops, which may have a tiny 
superficial bleb and is itchy. This, which may be termed the ‘ secondary reaction ‘, may last 
a variable time up to 48 hours or more and is liable to exacerbation from time to time, as, 
for example, when the bitten person is warm in bed. This stage, especially if a bleb forms, 
is liable to become excoriated or may even become septic. 
Immunity to the secondary reaction is soon developed. Such immunity is to a large 
extent local to the area frequently bitten, but apparently not entirely so. In the case of the 
writer, who after some years’ constant biting by the species has become entirely immune to 
the secondary reaction, there still remains a large degree of susceptibility to the initial 
wheal. 
A description of the reaction of man to the bites of A. aegypti has been given by Gordon 
and Crewe (1948). These authors state that the reaction in the majority of individuals does 
not develop until some considerable time after the bite, such reaction being termed by the 
authors ‘ the delayed reaction ‘. If persons showing a delayed reaction are irregularly 
exposed to further bites, a proportion become ‘sensitised’, that is they show an ‘irnmediate 
reaction’ and the delayed reaction ceases to occur. If regularly bitten at short intervals, 
they do not become sensitised and the delayed reaction becomes progressively less intense 
and of shorter duration. If persons showing an immediate reaction are irregularly exposed 
to further bites, the sensitivity persists for an indefinite period. If regularly bitten at short 
intervals, however, the immediate reaction becomes progressively, though irregularly, less. 
The desensitisation is highly specific, and persons sensitised to AZdes, Culex and Anopheles 
and subsequently desensitised to Ai;des still gave an immediate reaction to Culex and 
Anopheles. 
Reaction and immunity to mosquito bites have also been investigated by Brown, 
Griffiths, Erwin and Dyrenforth (1938), who describe Arthus’s phenomenon, namely 
wheals followed by blebs with subsequent necrosis and scarring following introduction of 
glandular substance into the skin. 
The natural assumption would be that these effects following the bite were due to the 
495 
THE BLOOD MEAL 
salivary secretion injected during the act. Schaudinn (1904), however, ascribed them to the 
products of yeasts and other micro-organisms which are always present in the diverticula. 
Leon (1924) came to the same conclusion, since he obtained no effect from the glands but 
did from the diverticula. Roy (1927) punctured the skin with a fine needle and rubbed gland 
substance and diverticula suspension over the puncture. He also obtained results (though 
small) from thediverticula but none from the glands. Hecht (1928), however, has found yeasts 
present in the diverticula only when mosquitoes are fed on sugary fluids, whilst secondary 
papules follow implantation of the glands, the effects of the bite being due, not to contents 
of the diverticula, but to the salivary secretion. 
The ‘initial reaction’ is here referred to as a ‘ wheal’, this describing its characters 
precisely. Wheals are of great value in quantitative testing work with AL;des aegypti, and in 
the testing of repellents their number and distribution on the experimental skin area in 
relation to the number of females used has been the most precise of all methods of assessing 
protection. No difficulty in the author’s experience has been found in those partaking in 
the experiments not being ‘sensitised’ or in loss of sensitisation following biting, and the 
extent of the latter after working with the species for more than a year with almost constant 
biting was only a matter of degree. 
It seems possible that there may be two distinct processes operating to produce the 
‘ initial’ and ‘ secondary’ reaction. The secondary reaction is presumably due to the injec- 
tion into the tissues of the salivary secretion. In view, however, of the mechanism of biting 
by what must amount to a considerable degree of cellular laceration through the action of 
the maxillae, it is thought the initial reaction might be the result of such trauma with the 
usual liberation of histamine. There would not seem to be anything contradictory in this 
to the views put forward by Gordon and Crewe, desensitisation then being development of 
immunity to the products of cellular trauma, not to an effect of the salivary secretion.* 
For the treatment of ordinary mosquito bites little has been advocated beyond the usual 
methods of allaying irritation by cooling lotions, application of ammonia, rubbing with 
grass or other household remedies. The subject has been dealt with to some extent by 
Howard (1917). W. R. Shannon (1943) has advocated administration by mouth of thiamin 
chloride (SO-100 mg. on the first day, followed by 10 mg. daily) to allay irritation and to 
diminish tendency to be bitten. But thiamin chloride (vitamin B, hydrochloride) was not 
found protective by Wilson, Matheson and Jackowskie (1944). See also Goldman, 
Thompson and Trica (1952) on cortisone acetate. A preparation, ’ anthisan cream ‘, by 
May and Baker, is on sale for irritation from mosquito bites. I have been informed by 
Mr Mattingly that he understands that a very dramatic reduction of swelling and irritation 
can be obtained by the application of certain antihistamines, for example Pyranisamine 
maleate, and that this and other more recent compounds are available in proprietary 
form, for example anthisan. 
REFERENCES 
ALLEN, A. C. (1949). Persistent ‘insect bites’ (dermal eosinophilic granulomas) simulating 
lympho-blastomas, histiocytosis and squamous cell carcinoma. Amer. J. Path. 24, 367. 
BISHOP, A. and GILCHRIST, B. M. (1944). A method for collecting sporozoites of Plasmodium gal- 
Zinaceum by feeding infectedkdesaegypti through animal membranes. Nature, Lond., 153,7 13. 
* See also Bristowe (1946), Goldman, Johnson and Ramsay (1952). Allen (1949) refers to persistent ‘insect 
bites’ (dermal eosinophic granulomas) simulating lymph blastomas, histiocytosis and squamous cell carcinoma. 
496 
REFERENCES 
BISHOP, A. and GILCHRIST, B. M. (1946). Experiments upon the feeding of AL;des aegypti through 
animal membranes, etc. Parasitology, 37, U-100. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BOYD, M. F. and KITCHEN, M. F. (1939). The demonstration of sporozoites in human tissues. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 19, 27-31. 
BRISTOWE, W. S. (1946). Man’s reaction to mosquito bites. Nature, Land., 158, 750. 
BROWN, A., GRIFFITHS, T. H. D., ERWIN, S. and DYRENFORTH, L. Y. (1938). Arthus’s phenomenon 
from mosquito bites. Sth. Med. J., Nashville, 31, 590-6. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). The anatomy and histology of the adult female mosquito. Rep. Malar. 
Comm. R. Sot. (4), l-20. London. 
CORNWALL, J. W. and PATTON, W. S. (1914). Some observations on the salivary secretion of the 
common blood-sucking insects and ticks. Ind. J. Med. Res. 2, 569-91. 
DARLING, S. T. (1910). Factors in the transmission and prevention of malaria in the Panama 
Canal Zone. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 4, 179-223. 
DAY, M. F. (1954). The mechanism of food distribution to midgut or diverticula in the mosquito. 
Aust. J. BioZ. Sci. 7, 5 15-24. 
DUFOUR, L. (1851). Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques sur les Dip&es. M&n. Acad. 
Sci., Paris, 11, 171-360. 
FINLAY, C. (1886). Yellow fever, its transmission by means of the CuZex mosquito. Amer. J. 
Med. Sci. 92, 395409. 
FULLEBORN, F. (1908). Uber Versuche an Hundefilarien und deren Ubertragung. Arch. Schz@s.- u. 
Tropenhyg. 12, Beih. 8, 5-43. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1956). Initiation and promotion of ovarian development in the mosquito AL;des 
(Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 375-80. 
GOLDI, A. (19 13). Die sanit;risch-pathologische Bedeutung der Insekten und verwandter Glieder- 
tiere. Berlin, pp. 43-5. 
GOLDMAN, L., JOHNSON, P. and RAMSAY, J. (1952). The insect bite reaction. I. The mechanism. 
J. Invest. Derm. 18, 403. 
GOLDMAN, L., THOMPSON, R. G. and TRICA, R. E. (1952). Cortisone acetate in skin diseases. 
Arch. Derm. Syph., N. Y., 65, 177. 
GORDON, R. M. (1922). The susceptibility of the individual to the bites of Stegomyia calopus. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. X6, 229-34. 
GORDON, R. M. and CREWE, W. (1948). Man’s reaction to the bites of AEdes aegypti. Trans. R. 
Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 42, 7-8. 
GORDON, R. M. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1939). A study of the behaviour of the mouth-parts 
of mosquitoes when taking up food from living tissue etc. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 33, 
259-78. 
GRASSI, B. (1901). Studi di uno zoologo sulla malaria. Rome. 
GRIFFITHS, R. B. and GORDON, R. M. (1951). A simple apparatus designed in order to observe 
insects feeding on living tissue or the penetration of helminth larvae. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. 
Med. Hyg. 44, 366. 
GRIFFITHS, R. B. and GORDON, R. M. (1952). An apparatus which enables the process of feeding 
by mosquitoes to be observed in the tissue of a live rodent together with an account of the 
ejection of saliva and its significance in malaria. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 46, 311-19. 
HECHT, 0. (1928). Uber die Sprosspilze, der Oesophagusausstulpungen und iiber der Giftwirkung 
der Speicheldriisen von Stechmiicken. Arch. SchzB.- u. Tropenhyg. 32, 561-75. 
HERTIG, A. T. and HERTIG, M. (1927). A technique for artificial feeding of sand-flies and mos- 
quitoes. Science, 65, 328-9. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1917). Remedies and preventives against mosquitoes. U.S. Dep. Agric., Frms’ 
Bull. no. 444, 1-15. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
KADLETZ, N. A. and KUSMINA, L. A. (1929). Experimentale Studien iiber den Saugprozess bei 
Anopheles mittels einer zwangsweisen Methode. Arch. Schz$s.- u. Tropenhyg. 33, 335-50. 
LEON, N. (1924). Contributions h Z’e’tude deparasites animaux de Roumanie 1898-1924. Bucharest. 
32 497 CH 
REFERENCES 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1915). Notes on the rearing of Stegomyia fasciata in London. J. Trop. 
Med. (Hyg.), 18, 193-6. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1930). The artificial feeding of mosquitoes by a new method which demon- 
strates certain functions of the diverticula. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 23, 329-31. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1931). The nutrition of adult mosquitoes. Preliminary contribution. Trans. 
R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 24, 465-72. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1887). Poison fangs and glands of the mosquito. Science, 10, 106-7. 
METCALF, R. L. (1945). The physiology of the salivary glands of Anopheles quadrimaculatus. 
J. Nat. Malar. Sot. 4, 271-8. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1903). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., Camb., 3, 
167-70, 186-96. 
PARKER, H. B., BEYER, G. E. and POTHIER, 0. L. (1903). Report on the working party. Yell. 
Fev. Inst. Bull. no. 13, 21-7. 
PERFILEV, P. P. (1930). Zur Frage tiber die vergleichende Anatomie van Anopheles. Mag. 
Parasit., Leningrad, 1, 75-96. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 19, 230. 
REAUMUR, R. A. F. (1738). Memoires pour servir a l’histoire des insectes. M&m. XIII. Histoire 
des cousins, vol. IV, pp. 573-636. L’Imprimerie Royale, Paris. 
ROBINSON, G. G. (1939). The mouth-parts and their function in the female mosquito Anopheles 
maculipennis. Parasitology, 31, 212-42. 
ROY, D. N. (1927). The physiology and function of the oesophageal diverticula and of the salivary 
glands in mosquitoes. Ind. J. Med. Res. 14, 995-1004. 
ROY, D. N. (1936). On the role of blood in ovulation in AL;des aegypti Linn. Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 
423-9. 
SCHAUDINN. F. (1904). Generations und Wirtswechsel bei Trypanosoma und Spirochaete. 
Arbeit. Kaiserl. GesundheitsAmt 20, 387-439. Berlin. 
SHANNON, W. R. (1943). An aid in the solution of the mosquito problem. Minn. Med. 26, 799. 
SHUTE, P. G. (1935). Agglutination of the red blood corpuscles of man, animals and birds by the 
salivary glands of Anopheles maculipennis. J. Trop. Med. (Hyg.), 38, 277-8. 
SHXJTE, P. G. (1940). Supernumerary and bifurcated acini of the salivary glands of Anopheles 
maculipennis. Riv. Malarial. 19, sez. 1, 16-19. 
SHUTE, P. G. (1948). The comparative distribution of oocysts of human malaria parasites on the 
stomach wall of Anopheles mosquitoes. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 42, 324. 
TREMBLEY, H. L. (1952). The distribution of certain liquids in the oesophageal diverticula and 
stomach of mosquitoes. Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 1, 693-710. 
VOGEL, R. (1921). Kritische und ergtinzende Mitteilungen zur Anatomie des Stechapparats der 
Culiciden. Zool. Jahrb., Anat. 42, 259-82. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2 (see also many later 
editions). Methuen and Co., London. 
WILSON, C. S., MATHESON, D. R. and JACKOWSKIE, L. A. (1944). Ingested thiamin chloride as a 
mosquito repellent. Science, 100, 147. 
WRIGHT, W. R. (1924). On the function of the oesophageal diverticula in the adult female 
mosquito. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 18, 77-82. 
YORKE, W. and MACFIE, J. W. S. (1924). The action of the salivary secretion of the mosquito and 
Glossina tachinoides on human blood. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 18, 103-8. 
498 
XXII 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
(a) THE SEXES 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES 
The male, as in the majority of mosquitoes, is distinguished from the female by the plumose 
antennae and the large hairy palpi, which in AFde,s aegypti are about as long as the pro- 
boscis in marked contrast to the very short female palpi only about a quarter of the length 
of this organ. In addition the male differs from the female in the absence of mandibles, 
narrower wings in proportion to their length and narrower scaling of these organs, a more 
developed fringe apically and absence of scales on the fringe margin, the presence of larger 
ungues on the fore- and mid-legs and a different ungual formula. The male differs also, not 
only in possessing the large gonocoxites (claspers) and other characters of the male hypo- 
pygium, but in the large and well-developed eighth abdominal segment contrasting with 
the small retracted part in the female. 
Of interest from the biological point of view is the marked and constant difference in 
size, the female being nearly twice the weight of the male and much more bulky and robust. 
The difference in size begins to be apparent in the fourth instar larva, is marked in the pupa 
and is present in about the same degree in the imago. 
The sexes differ also in many points of behaviour, in the blood-sucking habit, in length 
of life, in the speed of flight and in the note emitted in the hum. 
In all data regarding the imago it is necessary therefore to give separate valuation for the 
sexes. Since, however, the female is more important as a blood-sucking insect, as a carrier 
of disease and as an insect useful for experiment, it has received more attention in the 
literature than has the male, most observations where sex is not mentioned relating to the 
female. 
PROPORTION OF THE SEXES 
A characteristic of A. aegypti to which attention has been drawn by a number of observers is 
preponderance of the number of males over that of females hatching out. Rees (1901) is 
quoted by some authors as referring to A. aegypti when he notes that males hatch out first 
and in greatest numbers. Actually in his paper he refers to ‘mosquitoes’, but it is probable 
that he was here dealing with this species. Gordon (19228), however, definitely gives figures 
for the species, namely a total of 142 males to ninety-eight females (59.2 per cent males) 
with maximum food supply and 105 males to ninety-one females (53.6 per cent males) 
with a minimum of food. Young (1922) gives the relative number of males to females as 
323 to 194 (62.5 per cent males). He notes that preponderance of males appears to be a 
constant feature under conditions employed in the laboratory. 
Teesdale (1955), in two experiments with ninety-six and 134 eggs, hatched out respectively 
seventy-seven and 121 adults, sixty males and seventeen females and seventy-six males and 
499 32-2 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
forty-five females in the two series, giving for the eggs hatched out a percentage for males 
of 77.9 and 62.8 in the two series respectively. 
Mattingly (1956) found a proportion of five males to three females (62.5 per cent males) 
and a similar proportion for all published records for aegypti-albopictus hybrids. 
That an increased percentage of males over females is not, however, confined to A. aegypti 
or even to Ai;des would appear from data given by Qutubuddin (1952). Out of a total of 
4353 Culex fatigans bred out 2427 were males and 1926 females (56.1 per cent males). 
Table 34. Proportion of females to males in thirteen cultures 
Total 
n 
Culture 
IlO. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 Date 
27. iv. 43 
8. v. 43 
9. v. 43 
26. v. 43 
27. v. 43 
28. v. 43 
25. v. 43 
18. v. 43 
5. vii. 43 
6. vii. 43 
7. vii. 43 
22. vii. 43 
24. vii. 43 
2. viii. 43 
3. viii. 43 
4. viii. 43 
6. ix. 43 
7. ix. 43 
8. ix. 43 
9. ix. 43 
14. ix. 43 
15. ix. 43 
16. ix. 43 
17. ix. 43 
25. x. 43 
26. x. 43 
27. x. 43 
24. i. 44 
25. i. 44 
26. i. 44 Male Female 
865 542 
1,050 140 
177 700 
324 100 
73 106 
8 91 
1,142 846 
530 395 
835 558 
1,634 607 
71 504 
8 84 
1,021 432 
66 478 
1,686 316 
252 422 
23 401 
1,056 65 
719 554 
97 566 
12 346 
1,081 26 
350 270 
0 700 
30 328 
946 309 
14 537 
1 23 
1,749 135 
54 1,180 
6 83 
Grand total Left 
over 
23 
269 Male Female 
865 542 
1,227 840 Left Percentage 
over females* 
23 39.5 
269 47.5 
28 405 297 28 44.5 
111 1,142 846 111 45.6 
30 530 395 30 44.5 
126 835 558 126 45.0 
56 1,713 1,195 
75 1,087 910 56 42.2 
75 47.5 
289 1,961 1,139 289 42.1 
118 
73 
45 
21 1,884 1,531 118 46.7 
1,461 1,324 73 48.9 
961 869 45 48.7 
1,809 1,398 21 440 
15,880 11,844 1,264 45.0 
* In calculating the percentage for reasons given in the text the number of left-over larvae and pupae (including 
undiagnosed dead) has been added to the females. 
In Table 34 are given the results of counts carried out in 1943-4 as a routine in setting 
out standardised tests in connection with work on repellents (Christophers, 1947). It will 
be seen from the table that in all thirteen counts recorded, amounting in all to 27,724 
mosquitoes, males were consistently more numerous than females, though the percentage 
was not so high as counts already noted. These counts were carefully made from cultures 
obtained from standard egg-pots (see under chapter v describing technique), the number of 
pupae and any unchanged larvae or dead larvae being also counted after making up the 
day’s experimental cages. The eggs in the pots were massed eggs, the larvae being reared 
5oo 
THE SEXES 
from overnight hatching. Previous repeated trials had shown that with the technique 
adopted very few eggs failed to hatch as shown after replacing pots to hatch. 
Taking all the cultures 27,724 pupae gave 57.3 per cent males. Dead or unpupated 
larvae numbered in all 1264 and as noted elsewhere the majority of such larvae would almost 
certainly be females. Adding these to the females gives a percentage of 54.7 males. The 
lowest percentage of males was in experiment 11 (51.1 per cent) and the highest in experi- 
ment 1 (60.5 per cent). 
As will be seen later in chapter XXXI such a preponderance of males has considerable 
interest from the genetical point of view and an accurate figure is very desirable. If, how- 
ever, a really accurate determination is to be made, some important precautions are neces- 
sary. Rearing conditions should be such that practically all eggs used will safely reach the 
adult stage or be capable of having the sex determined. If the proportions in the offspring 
of single females are being determined, it would be necessary to see that all the eggs of a 
given ovulation are laid. Such a careful appraisal does not appear to have so far been made. 
For the present it can be said that males predominate to the extent of from approximately 
55 to 65 per cent. 
ORDER OF HATCHING OF THE SEXES 
Mention has been made that Rees (1901) not only noted that males were in excess, but that 
they hatched out first. Bacot (1916) also states that males are usually a day quicker in 
development than the females, and the same is noted by Gordon (19223) and by Putnam 
and Shannon (1934), as also probably by others. Such observations are in accordance with 
the counts made of male and female pupae on the first, second and subsequent days of 
collection as given in Table 35, where the results of routine counts made in connection with 
the testing of repellents during 1943-5 are given. 
Table 35. Counts of female and male pupae collected 
on successive days 
Day of 
collection 
First day 
Second day 
Third day 
Fourth day 
Left over 
Total Females Males 
2,130 10,547 
4,476 1,452 
2,223 167 
674 42 
997 - 
10,500 12,208 
But though the male larva reaches full development and pupates a day earlier than the 
female larva, the male pupa as will be seen from figures given under the pupa requires almost 
the same time from pupation to emergence as the much larger female pupa. 
BEHAVIOUR OF THE SEXES 
Behaviour of the male and female imago differs in a number of respects other than in those 
directly connected with sexual activity, for example in their behaviour in the presence of the 
host during feeding, in the character of their flight and in their general behaviour in a 
room. Thus males will hover about a person sitting in a room quite openly and in a different 
manner to the surreptitious approach of the female. 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
A careful experimental study of the sexual behaviour of A. aegypti is given by Roth 
(1948). The swarming of males so conspicuously evident in many Chironomidae, Tipulidae 
and some mosquitoes, such as Culexpipiens, is not a feature with Ak;des aegypti, though a 
modified form of swarming has been described, for example on a small scale in a corner 
of the laboratory. As in some other species males may show sensitivity to the wing note of 
the female. Roth and Willis (1952) note that males will respond to a tuning fork held close 
to the cage, clinging to the cloth so that females can be more conveniently captured. The 
effective vibration is between 320 and 512. 
(b) COPULATION AND FERTILISATION 
THE ACT OF COPULATION 
Translation of a passage in which Godeheu de Riville (1760) describes the act of copulation 
in what was presumably A. aegypti is given by Howard, Dyar and Knab. Another early 
description is given by Low (in Theobald, 1903) who states that as soon as the insects 
emerge from the pupae, even on the first day, they begin to copulate, the males flying after 
and chasing the females until they catch them, the pair then flying about joined together. 
A male was observed to copulate with a female several times. The time occupied was a 
minute or less. 
Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903), describing copulation in A. aegypti, say that 
the male seizes the female in flight-belly to belly-and keeps in this position by means of 
legs hooked to the thorax and by fixing its claspers near the vulva, the act lasting about a 
minute, the mosquitoes continuing in flight. 
MacGregor (1915) states that almost as soon as they can fly copulation occurs, usually 
in mid-air, either completely so, or more usually the female settled on the muslin, the male 
with the back and legs pressed against the support and the abdomen arched. He states 
that males do not alight on resting females. Bonne-Wepster and Brug (1932) state that in 
captivity copulation always began with both parties on the wing. It may be finished in the 
air or against the wall of the cage. In the latter case the female presses the male against the 
cage. These authors never saw a male alight on a resting female. Hovanitz (1946) states 
that in A. aegypti copulation is most frequent at rest after flight, common partly in flight 
and partly at rest and least common in flight. 
Our own experience is that copulation takes place quite commonly with the female at 
rest. It also takes place very commonly on the wing, especially when a number of the 
mixed sexes are disturbed and take suddenly to flight. Seemingly in the latter case it occurs 
at random as the insects fly about, a couple appearing to meet in air and then often 
tumbling together on to the floor of the cage. It is common at such times to see two, or 
even three, males clinging to the same female, the agglomeration tumbling about or flying. 
When coupling occurs with the female at rest the pair usually shortly take to flight. The 
act lasts a very short time and often seems more in the nature of a ‘pass’ than a true 
pairing. It never lasts more than some seconds. 
In copulation the bodies are opposed. Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) state that in 
mosquitoes with simple claws in the female (Culex, Anopheles) the position in copulation 
is end to end, the pair facing in opposite directions, whilst in those forms in which the 
female claws are toothed copulation takes place face to face, the pair clasping each other 
502 
COPULATION AND FERTILISATION 
with their claws. In A&Yes aegypti the bodies are opposed, the legs of the male clasping the 
female and the abdomen of the male arched upwards and clasping the tip of the female 
abdomen. A good picture of a couple in copulation is given by Wesenburg-Lund (1943). 
It is difficult to see what takes place when copulation begins in flight. When the female 
is at rest the male alights alongside and inserts himself beneath her, usually passing in from 
the side, and clasps her with his body opposed at a little distance. The couple then usually 
fly off. A very full description of copulation in A. aegypti is given by Roth (1948) in his 
paper on the sexual behaviour of A. aegypti. 
TIME AT WHICH COPULATION OCCURS 
Most authors note that copulation occurs early and independent of a blood meal. Macfie 
(1915) says that the species in captivity pair very soon after emergence, sometimes as soon 
as rested. In our experience copulation is at a maximum in the first few days after 
emergence. It may be so active on the second or third day that it is difficult to capture a 
female with a test-tube without including one or more males. At such times it occurs in 
bursts whenever the insects are disturbed and take to flight. Later it becomes less notice- 
able, though liable to occur so long as males are present. 
Copulation is not particularly noticeable at feeding time when the females on, say, the 
fifth day from emergence collect at once on the arm and the males become excited and 
active, flying backwards and forwards with a shrill hum in the upper parts of the cage. At 
most, towards the end of the operation, when males begin wandering over the arm, some 
may molest a female that is still feeding, often to be rebuffed. Even when nearly all, or all 
the females have left the arm to settle about the cage the males still maintain their to-and- 
fro flight without copulation to any extent taking place. Whether this would happen with 
females kept apart from males to feeding day is not known. On removal of the arm the 
males cease their activity. 
FERTILISATION 
The usual test of fertilisation is that the spermatheca contains spermatozoa. Little is 
known as to details of the process by which the spermatozoa become packed in the organ. 
Very rarely a mass of spermatozoa on sectioning may be found in the atrium and most 
probably spermatozoa pass up the spermathecal ducts by their own activity. 
Once fertilised A. aegypti is capable of laying fertile eggs for some considerable time. 
Macfie obtained fertile eggs 37 days after the last possible date for copulation and Bacot 
after 62 days. In Bacot’s observation, eggs laid subsequent to this were not fertile. Fielding 
records that a female which laid 752 eggs during 72 days of life, feeding sixteen times, 
originally segregated with two males and with no other chance of copulation, gave eggs 
that were 80-90 per cent fertile. 
Roy (1940) has shown that in Anopheles the presence of sperms in the spermatheca may 
act as a stimulus to ovarian development. More recently Gillett (1955) has shown that in 
a certain strain of A. aegypti mating may be a necessary stimulus to full development of 
the eggs and oviposition (see chapter II under ‘strains ‘). 
At 20-25” C. Marchoux et al. (1903) found fertilisation to be the rule. Below 20” C. 
the proportion unfertilised was considerable. 
503 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
(c) OVIPOSITION 
THE ACT OF OVIPOSITION 
Mitchell (1907) and also Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) give a translation of a description 
of the act of oviposition by Agramonte. 
The mosquito alighted upon the water, whichwas ina small beaker inside the jar, with legs spread 
apart. The abdominal segments being bent forwards and downwards, she dipped her whole body 
until the last segment touched the surface of the water; then she rose, walked on a few steps, and 
dipped again. This she would do repeatedly (14 to 22 times), when she would remain for a slightly 
longer time with the last abdominal segment touching the water, and would allow a minute egg 
to issue forth upon the surface. In this way she laid at the rate of 3 eggs per minute, resting quietly 
after every sixth or eighth egg for about 30 seconds when she would resume the process. 
Fielding (1919) states that the favourite position is resting on the side of the receptacle 
with the tip of the abdomen just touching the water. Eggs were often laid on the water as 
females moved about on it. Up to fifteen eggs may be laid in a batch. 
Owing to the habit of A. aegypti laying eggs a few at a time at intervals and the incon- 
spicuousness of the newly laid eggs, which are almost invisible on white filter paper, it is 
not easy to observe females in the act of oviposition. It has, however, been observed on a 
number of occasions. On most of these the female was one isolated in a specimen tube. 
After remaining for some days, following upon feeding, almost entirely at rest near the top 
of the filter paper slip or on the muslin cover of the tube the insect shortly before ovipositing 
begins to move about in a restless way. Shortly after this ovipositing begins. 
The insect during the act has much the same attitude as when resting, but the abdomen is 
from time to time bent downwards in a curved manner and is moved about to touch the 
wet surface. Each time the tip touched the surface an egg was seen to have been deposited. 
The action was a rather unexpected one from the deliberate manner in which the abdomen 
was used first to touch one place and then another, much as an elephant might use its 
trunk. Without the body moving, eggs were laid at spots 2 or 3 mm. apart, the abdomen 
moving laterally quite distinctly to do this. After laying four or five eggs the body was 
often raised and the abdomen straightened out, whilst the apex was vigorously rubbed by 
the hind-legs. The abdomen was then lowered as before and the depositing of eggs con- 
tinued. After laying a group of about twenty eggs the female in each case moved to 
another part of the tube. The eggs were found to be adherent to the glass when the film of 
liquid was dried off. 
SELECTION OF A SITE FOR OVIPOSITION 
Two issues are here concerned, namely (1) choice of the type of site, and (2) choice of the 
position where the eggs are to be laid. The first relates to the type of breeding place selected 
by the insect and has already been discussed when dealing with the nature of the breeding 
places made use of by the species. The second is concerned with exactly where in the 
chosen receptacle the female places her eggs. It is mainly the second issue which can be 
studied in the laboratory and with which we are here concerned. 
In the laboratory A. aegypti at full maturation of the ovaries will, under almost any 
conditions, deposit its eggs freely on any water or wet surface that may be available. It 
appears never to lay on a dry surface and in the absence of water or a wet surface will hold 
504 
OVIPOSITION 
its eggs.* The wet surface may be glass, earthenware, filter paper, sponge or the floor of 
the cage wet with seeped or spilled water. 
They may be laid (1) on the surface of the water; (2) at the edge of the water, almost 
invariably on the wet surface just above the edge. Which of these sites is chosen depends 
largely upon the nature of the receptacle. If this is of glass, the majority of the eggs are 
laid on the water. If of unglazed earthenware, they are laid along the edge. Hence if 
floating eggs are required, a glass pot should be placed in the cage and vice versa. Howard, 
Dyar and Knab say that A. aegypti lays on the surface of the water only in captivity, glass 
being an unsuitable surface. Probably glass is too smooth to give the foothold that 
earthenware gives. That in the case of the earthenware pot both water and wet earthenware 
surface are available points to the fact that the insects prefer the latter. The accumulation 
of a line of eggs at the water’s edge is not as sometimes thought the result of eggs being 
drawn into this position by capillarity. Actually Agdes eggs are not very apt to be drawn to 
the edge by capillarity, though empty shells and collapsed eggs are. The eggs are so laid 
in situ by the female and are retained in position by their sticky chorionic pads until when 
dry they are firmly cemented in place by this same structure. 
Obtaining eggs on wet filter paper may be a convenient method for enabling small 
samples of eggs to be used in experimentation. Floating eggs collected on cover-glasses or 
slides may also be useful for some purposes. But as noted in the section on technique the 
most suitable method and one with many advantages for obtaining and storing eggs is by 
the use of unglazed earthenware pots. Also, it may be noted from what has been said about 
hatching that filter paper, where eggs are employed for critical hatching data, requires 
to be used with much caution. Recently the effect of the physical characters of the container 
on oviposition and the desirability of using a rough porous surface have been emphasised 
by O’Gower (1955) in respect to A. scutellaris. 
Eggs are invariably laid with the ventral surface, that is the surface furnished with the 
peculiar refractile bodies, upwards. When not over-crowded they are mostly laid in lines. 
Very often inspection shows that the line has followed a streak in the glass, or that the eggs 
have been laid along the edge of the filter paper strip where this meets the glass. In this case 
the eggs are almost invariably cemented to the glass, not to the paper. Usually the eggs are 
laid lenthwise in the direction of the line, but not necessarily all pointing in the same direction. 
A point frequently referred to in the literature is the question of the choice for oviposition 
of the suitable fluid. It is commonly stated that this is by preference water containing 
organic matter, as against clean water. Beattie (1932) found the largest number of eggs on 
test bottles containing leaf infusion (8309 eggs from forty-two layings, as against 1241 eggs 
with twenty-nine layings with distilled water). In the laboratory, however, females appear 
to lay without any hesitation on clean tap-water and as a routine our pots have always 
been boiled and well scrubbed and placed in the cage with fresh clean tap-water. There are 
certain advantages in cleanliness in this respect and, to avoid unnecessary fouling by pre- 
oviposition defaecation, the pots for oviposition are freshly changed after this has taken place. 
It is doubtful indeed if there is any very marked selection of the character of the water 
if other conditions are suitable, except in respect to strong salinity or other objectionable 
feature. Fielding, for example, notes that eggs may be laid on 40 per cent sea-water. 
Wallis (1954), studying the oviposition activity of mosquitoes including A. aegypti, found 
* Incidentally 
ch. VI (d). if it did so the eggs would certainly perish ; see description of changes following oviposition in 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
that the female could still detect an objectionable amount of salt when the movements of 
the abdomen were restricted and the palps, proboscis and antennae were coated with wax, 
and considered that, in general, sensitivity was located in the tarsal segments (see ch. XXIX). 
RELATION OF BLOOD MEAL TO FERTILISATION AND 
OVARIAN DEVELOPMENT 
The blood meal has little or no relation to copulation or fertilisation. Marchoux, Salim- 
beni and Simond state that a blood meal is not necessary to fertilisation. Macfie (1915) 
states that fertilisation can take place without feeding. Howard (1923) says that virgin 
females will feed, but that fertilised females are more greedy. Brug (1928) states that un- 
fertilised females suck blood as readily as fertilised and, contrary to the statement by Macfie, 
(19 15) they also lay eggs (unfertilised). 
That for ovulation a blood meal is necessary is now generally accepted. It seems to be 
immaterial at what stage of life the blood meal is taken. Bacot records that a female fed 
56 days on honey and white of egg laid fertile eggs 4 days after the first blood meal. 
Fielding, who failed to obtain eggs from females fed on a variety of foods other than blood, 
also found that egg production ceased on substitution of banana for blood. Gordon (1922) 
offered fifty-four females serum, washed red cells and whole blood and found eggs pro- 
duced only on the last-mentioned. 
That more than one blood meal is necessary before A. aegypti can develop its eggs has 
been sometimes stated. Whilst this is obviously incorrect where a full blood meal has been 
taken it raises the question how much blood is necessary. This has been very fully investi- 
gated by Roy (1936) whose work on the weight of blood taken at a meal has already been 
referred to. This author compared the number of eggs which were laid following imbibition 
of different amounts of blood. The data given in Table 36 are taken from his paper. 
Table 36. Number of eggs laidfollowing upon d@erent amounts 
of blood feed (from data given by Roy) 
Range Number 
blood of 
(mg.1 females 
OGO.5 21 
06-1.0 28 
1.1-1.5 35 
16-2.0 34 
2.1-2-s 11 
26-3-O 6 
3-l-3.5 2 Mean 
weight 
blood I 
~mg.) 
0.38 
0.77 
1.22 
1.79 
2.17 
2.72 
3.2 Total Mean 
lumber of number of 
eggs laid eggs laid 
0 0 
197 7.04 
1197 34.2 
1699 47.03 
544 49.45 
404 67.33 
171 85.5 Number 
of times 
no eggs 
laid 
21 
21 
2 Number 
of eggs 
per mg. 
- 
9.14 
28.06 
27.77 
22.71 
24.77 
26.72 
The table shows very clearly that to obtain a mean of 85.5 eggs, which it will later be 
shown is about the normal, a full meal of 3.0-3.5 mg. blood is required and that for any 
eggs at all at least 0.5-1.0 mg., or on the average 0.8 mg., of blood is necessary. 
Further, small amounts of blood in successive feeds were capable of producing eggs 
only when the weight of blood taken at the third feed exceeded 0.5 mg. The number of 
eggs under such conditions was, however, as a rule small. In one batch mosquitoes given 
feeds from 0.13 to O-45 mg. produced no eggs. But seven females given over 0.47 all 
produced some eggs. The author considered that these minimal amounts were necessary 
to stimulate the ovaries and that excess over this goes to form eggs. In chapter xxu in 
506 
OVIPOSITION 
the section on hormones are recorded recent findings that a hormone secreted in response 
to nervous stimuli aroused by blood entering the gut, or stretching the gut wall, is necessary 
for initiation and promotion of ovarian development and Roy’s minimum dose may be 
such a stimulus. For the present it will suffice to note that successful oviposition is de- 
pendent on sufficient blood to enable the ovarian follicles to develop to full maturity and 
that this entails for a normal oviposition 30-3.5 mg. of blood, or in other words a full 
meal. 
Among recent papers dealing with nutritive requirements for development of the ovaries 
and oviposition are: Greenberg (1951), Dimond et al. (1955, 1956), Lea et al. (1956), 
Woke (1955), Woke et al. (1956). All deal with A. aegypti. 
TIME FROM BLOOD MEAL TO OVIPOSITION 
Most references on this point are of a rather general nature. One of the most detailed of 
early statements is that of Marchoux et al. (1903) who gave the following data for different 
temperatures. 29-30” C. 48 hours, almost always by third day, sometimes fourth. 
25-27” C. Fourth to fifth day. 
20-25” C. Fourth day, sometimes seventh to ninth. 
Under 20” C. May be retarded 26-7 days. 
A complicating fact is that, unlike many culicines, A. aegypti does not usually lay all its 
eggs at one act of oviposition. Buxton and Hopkins (1927) note that in nature it usually 
deposits about twenty eggs at any one time. In captivity, too, it is not unusual for a female 
to take several days to lay all the eggs of one batch. Normally, however, after a full gorge 
on human or rabbit blood, mature fertilised insects under laboratory conditions, once 
oviposition is started, commonly lay all their eggs within the space of at most a few 
hours. 
The time after a blood meal when eggs are laid depends upon the temperature and to 
some extent on the conditions under which the gravid female is kept. Two methods of 
observation are open to be used, namely (1) when large numbers of the insects are fed in 
cages; and (2) when single females after feed are isolated in tubes with a strip of filter 
paper and a little water. 
In the first case, at a temperature of 25” C. and 70 per cent relative humidity, egg-laying 
in the author’s experience usually begins on the afternoon of the third day from feed, 
counting the day of feed as 0. Feeding was usually carried out between 2 and 4 p.m. on 
the human arm with cages of some hundreds of females and males on the fifth to the 
seventh day from emergence, some 90 per cent of the females gorging. A large number of 
such layings were carried out as a routine in the course of some years’ work on repellents 
and records kept show that at the temperature and humidity noted at most one or two 
females could have laid before 68 hours, the usual time for appearance of the first eggs 
being about 70 hours. The great bulk of eggs were laid between 72 and 112 hours. Com- 
paratively few were laid from the sixth day onwards. A few observations of this kind have 
been made with cages in an incubator at 28” C. In some cases oviposition began as early 
as 48 hours and was practically completed by 96 hours. 
Single females in tubes mostly began to oviposit some time during the third day (6% 
75 hours) when kept at 25” C. At 23” C. there was a marked delay, making the time of 
commencing oviposition commonly a little under 4 days (80-90 hours), and at 18” C. 
507 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
the time was about doubled, retained eggs (see chapter VII) being for the first time 
noted. 
In all the above observations the females were fed on fifth to seventh day from emergence. 
When females are fed on the second day from emergence, as previously noted, they do not 
engorge so fully and as was to be expected oviposition was delayed. Not only was there 
delay but considerable irregularity, which was very noticeable compared with the very 
constant results from later-fed females. 
In all the above the mosquitoes were largely in the dark, being in a constant-temperature 
room with artificial light left on only when in occupation. Since these observations were 
made, an important research on oviposition time has been undertaken by Haddow and 
Gillett (1957) showing that the time of day, and thus the time from the blood meal, is 
largely determined by the effect of light. With normal daylight and darkness these authors 
found a marked peak of oviposition in the late afternoon, that is taking 4 hourly periods 
starting at 6-O a.m. (sunrise) the peak was in the period 2.0-6.0 p.m. When subject to 
continuous artificial light (closed room with 4-foot fluorescent daylight-type tubes) ovi- 
position was without any marked peak period, and when illumination was made opposite 
to the normal day and night the peak occurred at 2.0-6.0 a.m. 
Regarding the time from blood meal to oviposition in these experiments cages with 
females (20) and males (lo), emerged on the same day, were fed at 8.0 a.m., 4.0 p.m. and 
12.0 midnight forming two series each of three cages so fed. The first series were kept at 
27” C. and 70 per cent relative humidity under continuous artificial daylight as noted 
above. Oviposition began respectively in the three timed feedings at 58, 55 and 52 hours. 
The second series was kept at a temperature of 23” C. and a humidity much as in the first 
series, but under normal daylight and darkness. The time of beginning oviposition was 
respectively in the three timed feedings at 77, 73 and 83 hours from the blood feed, that is 
at 1 .O p.m., 1 .O a.m. and 11 .O a.m. respectively. The authors summarise their conclusions 
as follows : 
Under conditions of almost constant temperature and humidity, but with normally fluctuating 
daylight, A&Iees aegypti shows a regular cycle of oviposition, with one peak of major activity, 
which occurs in the afternoon. Under controlled conditions with constant light, this pattern 
breaks down and laying becomes aperiodic. Where the hours of light and darkness are artificially 
reversed (by means of daylight-type fluorescent lamps), the cycle also is reversed. Darkness delays 
the onset of oviposition. Light is the master factor, and there is a strong suggestion that the peak 
of oviposition is associated with the onset of light, and, furthermore, that the underlying mechanism 
may be hormonal. t 
Gillett (1956a) has distinguished as between ‘ ovarian development’ or development of 
the oocytes in the ovarioles; ‘ ovulation ’ or passing of a ripe oocyst into the oviduct ; and 
‘ oviposition ’ or egg-laying. The times of initiation and completion of these, especially of 
the first and third, are each liable to be dependent on circumstances, for example ovarian 
development as recently shown is initiated by certain stimuli and hormonal effects, and the 
period to completion is dependent on temperature, amount of blood taken, age of the 
mosquito when fed and other conditions. Ovulation does not necessarily mean oviposition; 
and oviposition, besides being dependent on full ovarian development, may quite well be 
affected by many conditions, including as shown above by ‘ light ‘, but such also may well 
include ability or inclination of the insect to find a satisfactory site for the act. Regarding 
the terms used it might be preferable to make ‘ ovulation ’ equivalent to completion of egg 
508 
OVIPOSITION 
formation, which would of course be indicated by passage of at least one egg into the 
oviduct, but might be arrived at without this happening. From the data given by Haddow 
and Gillett’s observations an estimate of the time to completion of ovarian development 
might be made as 55 hours at 27” C. (mean of the times in continuous light) and 73 hours 
at 23” C. (time when those fed at 4.0 p.m. laid at optimal time 4-5 p.m.) in this number of 
hours. Those fed at midnight (83 hours) it may be presumed were waiting overnight for 
appropriate light conditions (11-12 noon). 
Under normal favourable conditions oviposition once started is commonly completed 
in the laboratory in 5 or 6 hours. At 28” C. thirty-nine out of forty-four (89 per cent) of 
females completed oviposition in 6 hours or less. At 25” C. thirty-six out of fifty-four 
(66 per cent) and at 23” C. eight out of twenty (40 per cent) did so in the same time. At 
18” C. the time taken for completion of oviposition from the start was a full day or 
more. 
Usually oviposition has been found to be complete on dissecting the mosquito after a 
reasonable time had been given for completion of the act. Short of dissection a guide to 
completion is the condition of the abdomen, which on completion of egg-laying is thin and 
cylindrical, with the ventral sclerites deeply folded under the tergites, so that the prominent 
lateral silvery spots on the sternites, so conspicuous in the distended abdomen, are quite 
hidden. A useful guide to the impending commencement of oviposition in a cage of fed 
mosquitoes is the passing of dark faeces staining the filter paper fans or soiling the receptacle. 
Gillett (19563) has noted that mosquitoes that do not develop oocytes beyond stage 3 
usually eliminate the blood meal by defaecation at 28-32 hours from the feed, whereas 
those that develop eggs to maturity do so 7-10 hours later. 
DATA REGARDING SUBSEQUENT EGG BATCHES 
Since more than one batch of eggs is normally laid in the lifetime of the female, provided 
there are further blood meals, the total number of eggs laid by one female may be con- 
siderable. Macfie (19 15) records instances of fifteen and ten ovipositions, the first at 
intervals of 3 days by a female that lived 50 days, the second at longer intervals by a female 
that lived 60 days. Fielding records a female which laid 752 eggs in 72 days. In the first 
31 days it fed eight times and laid 437 eggs (55 eggs per feed), in the next 3 1 days it fed 
six times and laid 260 eggs (43 eggs per feed) and in the next 10 days it fed twice and laid 
55 eggs. Owing, however, to heavy mortality at oviposition the number of females with 
such numerous ovipositions is small and even after the first oviposition there is a consider- 
able reduction in numbers. Howard, Dyar and Knab note that the French Commission 
(Marchoux et al.) found that out of 100 females only thirty laid eggs a second time and 
twenty-one from three to seven times. The largest number of ovipositions observed in a 
single female was seven. H. A. Johnson (1937) records females producing viable eggs to an 
age of 6 weeks. 
The data given in the previous subsection relate to the time of oviposition following 
upon the first blood meal. Owing to the fact that after oviposition the follicles next fol- 
lowing on the shed follicles are to a certain extent advanced in development, the time for 
these to reach maturity is, in the case of Anopheles, somewhat shortened as compared 
with that for the first oviposition. Whether this occurs in A&les aegypti has not been 
ascertained. 
509 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
NUMBER OF EGGS LAID 
Very varied estimates of the number of eggs laid at an oviposition 
in the literature. Among earlier records are the following. 
Marchoux et al. (1903) 
Otto and Neumann (1905) 
Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12) 
J. R. Taylor (Havana) 
American Commission 
French Commission 
Goeldi 
Boyce (1911) 
Howlett (1913) 
Macfie (1915) 
Buxton and Hopkins (1927) 
Connor (1924) 
F. H. Taylor 
Roy (1936) by A. aegypti are given 
First batch up to 100. Later batches below 30 
20-40 or more 
35-l 14 
40-l 50 
First batch 70-95; max. 144; later batches max. 30 
50-100 
27-97 
About 50 
100 to as few as 7 
20 on each occasion in nature 
35-150 
up to 80 
Average max. 76 
What at first seems very puzzling is that so many of these determinations are far below 
the number of follicular tubes in the ovaries. The ovaries of A. aegypti, like those of other 
mosquitoes, consist of a number of ovarian tubules in which successive follicles develop 
into eggs, the lowest in the tubes simultaneously undergoing full development whilst the 
next follicle behind remains undeveloped until after oviposition and another blood meal. 
In normally fed females many dissections following a blood meal at different intervals of 
time have invariably shown all the lower follicles simultaneously developed. The number of 
such follicles in the two ovaries is approximately 120. The number of eggs following a full 
blood meal should therefore be about one hundred. In Culex molestus a different condition 
may be found, namely that only a proportion of the lower follicles show development. 
This has not been seen in AL;des aegypti, but may possibly occur under some conditions. 
In most of the above estimates the number of eggs at an oviposition clearly relates to the 
number laid under observation, no indication being given whether this might differ from 
the total number of oocysts developing to maturity, as might be shown by dissection. 
In Table 38 is shown the number of females out of thirty observed that laid eggs in 
numbers between 85 (the lowest) and 125 (the highest). The mean was 115 eggs. The 
results were verified by dissection, the ovaries being found empty of developed follicles 
(eggs) except in a few instances where one or two retained eggs were found. To explain 
the very low figures for the number of eggs sometimes given it must be supposed either that 
the eggs counted did not include all the eggs formed, or that only a proportion of the lower 
follicles underwent development, or more probably that eggs were retained (see later). 
There does not appear to be any close relation between the number of eggs and the size 
of the female. This would appear from the figures by Roy given in Table 39 and my own 
results as given in Table 37.” 
* The number of eggs laid in relation to the amount of blood ingested has recently been the subject of investi- 
gation by Woke et al. (1956). A single first blood meal was taken at different days from emergence between the 
fifth and twenty-eighth days. The blood taken ranged from 0.1 to 4.8 mg. and the eggs laid from 0 to 136. The means 
for feeds on fifth to fourteenth day were 89, 85,95 and 86. The number of eggs rose with O-5 increment of blood 
from 0 in a correlated curve to 99 beyond which the curve levelled off. Postponement of the first feed to 28 days 
led to a lower number (mean 56). Size of mosquito did not affect the number. 
510 
OVIPOSITION 
Table 37. Number of eggs laid by females of direrent weight 
and wing length 
Weight of 
female after 
oviposition Wing length Number of 
(mg.1 (mm.) eggs laid* 
2.01 3.33 126 
2.04 3.37 100 
2.08 3.55 126 
2.30 3.48 116 
2.30 3.37 117 
2.32 3.48 132 
240 3.48 114 
243 3.41 133 
2.49 3.62 123 
264 3.48 120 
* In all cases ovaries examined. An occasional retained egg in a few cases included. 
Table 38. Frequency distribution of number of eggs laid 
Number of eggs per batch 80-9 90-9 100-9 1 lo-19 120-9 130-9 
Number of mosquitoes laying 2 2 4 14 8 0 
Table 39. Number of eggs laid by females of d$Cerent weight 
(from data given by Roy) 
Class 
(mg.1 
Below 1.0 
1.1-1.5 
16-2-o 
2.1-2.5 Mean weight 
unfed Mean number Total number 
(mg.1 of eggs laid of females 
0.85 42 3 
1.35 44 16 
1.82 57 6 
2.17 36 2 
EGG LAYING BY UNFERTILISED FEMALES 
The laying of eggs by unfertilised females was stated by Macfie (1915) not to occur. That 
unfertilised females do lay eggs, however, is now generally recognised, the points at 
issue being the degree to which they do so and circumstances associated with this. A very 
complete study in this respect has been made by Lang (1956) and by Wallis and Lang 
(1956) who have compared egg production in continuously mated females with that by 
virgin females. The following are the chief conclusions arrived at: 
1. There is no difference in the engorgement rate at the feed. 
2. Continuously mated females produce more eggs than virgin females, one-third of which 
failed to lay. 
3. The average time for oviposition for virgin females was longer than that for mated females 
and more variable. Of forty-six mated females 89 per cent oviposited within 7 days. Of 128 virgin 
females only 55 per cent oviposited within this period. With partial or continuously mated females 
maximum oviposition was within 7 days, but only 60 per cent of virgin females gave maximum 
oviposition in this period. 
4. Dissection of ovaries 2-3 days after feed provides a rigid assay for presence of an ovarian 
stimulation factor in an experiment. 
5. Feeding on sucrose did not provide a stimulus, showing that it is unlikely that distension of 
the abdomen acts as a stimulus, which is more likely to be from some chemical in blood. 
511 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
Many interesting facts regarding the effect of mating and other stimuli connected with 
oviposition have been recently given by Clements (1956) and by Gillett (1955, 1956) (see 
section on hormones in chapter XXXI). 
RETAINED EGGS 
That eggs may be retained beyond their natural time is commonly shown by females that 
have not had access to water. Goeldi (1905) notes that eggs may be retained 23-102 days 
and still laid. Woke (1955) records that female A. aegypti forced to withhold oviposition 
by absence of water for from 5 to 90 days from the blood meal may still oviposit when 
given moist filter paper. 
In the author’s experience dissection of females isolated in tubes that have been con- 
sidered as having completed oviposition has rarely shown any considerable number of 
retained eggs. Under 2 per cent usually show one or two eggs still retained in the common 
oviduct or cavity of the ovary. That such eggs are mature is shown by their appearance and 
the fact that on exposure they darken and become quite black as in the normally laid egg. 
In females from cages the presence of a few retained eggs has been more frequent (up to 
21 per cent). 
Among a small number of females fed and kept at 18” C. two were found which had laid 
respectively 20 and 50 eggs, but in which 94 and 73 fully matured eggs were found still 
largely in position in the ovaries. On exposure the majority of these darkened only 
slowly, showing that they were mature. 
It should perhaps be mentioned here that all eggs when first laid (see ch. VI (d)), and 
whilst still white, measure only about 0*5-O-6 mrn., whereas the same eggs when darkened 
give the usual measurement for eggs of about 0.6-0.7 mm. Failure of retained eggs to meet 
normal egg measurement does not therefore invalidate the fact that they are fully developed. 
In many cases retained eggs have already within the body partly or fully darkened. 
OVARIAN CHANGES 
In the unfed 5-day female the ovaries, when dissected out and allowed to lie in salt solution, 
measure about a millimetre in length and in the insect are situated in the hinder parts of 
the fifth and sixth segments. On the fourth day after the blood meal, just before oviposition, 
they measure up to about 3 mm. and almost completely fill the abdomen from the first to 
the seventh segment, though the swollen abdomen is never so distended as after a full 
blood meal. At this time the gut is empty and even the ventral diverticulum occupies a 
very small space. 
At oviposition the follicles, now in the form of eggs, occupying the lower ends of the 
follicular tubes, pass one by one into the oviducts with the micropilar end directed pos- 
teriorly and the rather concave ventral surface directed inwards. They are fertilised as they 
pass the opening of the spermathecal ducts, some dissections suggesting that as they pass 
this point a single spermatozoon with its head directed forwards lies at the opening ready 
to perform this function. 
REFERENCES 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). Rep. Yell. Fev. Comm. (West Africa), London. 
BEATTIE, V. F. (1932). The physico-chemical factors of water in relation to mosquitoes breeding 
in Trinidad. Bull. Ent. Res. 23, 477-96. 
REFERENCES 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BOYCE, R. (19 11). The prevalence, distribution and significance of Stegomyia fasciata (calopus Mg.) 
in West Africa. Bull. Ent. Res. 1, 233-63. 
BRUG, S. L. (1928). Remarks on Prof. Hoffmann’s paper. Meded. Volks. Ned.-Znd. Foreign ed. 
17, 184-5. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1927). Researches in Polynesia and Melanesia. Parts 
I-V. Mem. Lond. Sch. Hyg. Trop. Med. no. 1. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1956). Hormonal control of ovary development in mosquitoes. J. Exp. Biol. 
33, 21 l-23. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1924). Suggestions for developing a campaign to control yellow fever. Amer. 
J. Trap. Med. 4, 277-307. 
DIMOND, J. B., LEA, A. A., BROOKS, R. F. and DE LONG, D. M. (1955). A preliminary note on 
some nutritional requirements for reproduction in female Aedes aegypti. Ohio J. Sci. 55, 
209-l 1. 
DIMOND, J. B., LEA, A. A., HAHNERT, W. F. and DE LONG, D. M. (1956). The amino-acids 
required for egg production in Ad;des aegypti. Canad. Entom. 88, 57-62. 
FIELDING, J. W. (1919). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata Fabr. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 13, 259-96. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955). Behaviour differences in two strains of AL;des aegypti. Nature, Lond., 176, 
124. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1956a). Genetic differences affecting egg-laying in the mosquito Acdes (Stegomyia) 
aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 362-74. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1956b). Initiation and promotion of ovarian development in the mosquito 
Ak;des (Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 375-80. 
GODEHEU DE RIVILLE (1760). Mkmoire sur l’accouplement des cousins. M&m. Acad. Sci., Paris, 
3, 617-22. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). OS mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Para. 
GORDON, R. M. (1922 b). See references in ch. xx, p. 481. 
GREENBERG, J. (1951). Some nutritional requirements of adult mosquitoes (Ai;des aegypti) for 
oviposition. J. Nutr. 43, 27-35. 
HADDOW, A. J. and GILLETT, J. D. (1957). Observations on the oviposition-cycle of AL;des 
(Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 51, 159-69. 
HOVANITZ, W. (1946). Comparison of mating behaviour, growth rate and factors influencing egg- 
hatching in South American Haemogogus mosquitoes. Physiol. 2002. 19, 35-53. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1923). The yellow fever mosquito. U.S. Dep. Agric. Frms’ Bull. no. 1354. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (19 12). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (1913). Stegomyia fasciata. Proc. 3rd Meet. Gen. Mal. Comm. Madras, 1912, 
pp. 205. 
JOHNSON, H. A. (1937). See references in ch. xx, p. 482. 
LANG, C. A. (1956). The influence of mating on egg production by At?des aegypti. Amer. J. Trop. 
Med. Hyg. 5, 909-14. 
LEA, A. O., DIMOND, J. B. and DE LONG, D. M. (1956). Role of diet in egg development of 
mosquitoes (Ai;des aegypti). Science, 123, 890. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (19 15). See references in ch. xx, p. 482. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1915). Notes on the rearing of Stegomyia fasciata in London. J. Trop. 
Med. (Hyg.), 18, 193-6. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). See references in ch. I (f>, p. 19. 
MATTINGLEY, P. F. (1956). See references in ch. II (c), p. 47. 
MITCHELL, E. G. (1907). Mosquito Life. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London. 
O’GOWER, A. K. 1955. The influence of physical properties of a water container surface upon 
its selection by the gravid females of Ai;des scutellaris scutellaris (Walker) for oviposition 
(Diptera: Culicidae). Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S.W. 79, 211-18. 
OTTO, M. and NEUMANN, R. 0. (1905). See references in ch. I (f), p. 19. 
33 513 
MATING AND OVIPOSITION 
PUTNAM, P. and SHANNON, R. A. (1934). The biology of Stegomyia under laboratory conditions. 
2. Egg-laying capacity and longevity of adults. Proc. Ent. Sot. Wash. 36, 217-42. 
QUTUBUDDIN, M. (1952). The emergence and sex ratio of Culex fatigens Wied. (Diptera: Culi- 
cidae) in laboratory experiment. Bull. Ent. Res. 43, 549. 
RAZES, D. C. (1901). Malaria: its parasitology, with a description of methods of demonstrating the 
organisms in man and animals. Practitioner (new series), 13, 271-300. 
ROTH, L. M. (1948). A study of mosquito behaviour. An experimental laboratory study of the 
sexual behaviour of Aedes aegypti (L.). Amer. Midl. Nat. 40, 265-352. 
ROTH, L. M. and WILLIS, E. R. (1952). Method of isolating males and females in laboratory 
colonies of Aedes aegypti. J. Econ. Ent. 45, 344-5. 
ROY, D. N. (1936). On the role of blood in ovulation in Aedes aegypti Linn. Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 
423-9. 
ROY, D. N. (1940). Influence of spermathecal stimulation on the physiological activities of 
Anopheles subpictus. Nature, Lond., 145, 747-8. 
TAYLOR, F. H. (1942). Contributions to a knowledge of Australian Culcidae. No. V. Proc. 
Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 67, 277-8. 
TEESDALE, C. (1955). Studies on the bionomics of AFdes aegypti (L.) in its natural habitats in a 
coastal region of Kenya. Bull. Ent. Res. 40, 71 l-42. 
THEOBALD, F. V. (1903). See references in ch. I (e), p. 18. 
WALLIS, R. C. (1954). A study of oviposition activity of mosquitoes. Amer. J. Hyg. 60, 135-68. 
WALLIS, R. C. and LANG, C. A. (1956). Egg formation and oviposition in blood-fed AFdes 
aegypti. Mosquito News, 16, 283-6. 
WESENBERG-LUND, C. (1943). Biologie der Stisswasserinsekten. Copenhagen, p. 433. 
WOKE, P. A. (1955). Deferred oviposition in Aedes aegypti (Linn.). Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 48, 
39-46. 
WOKE, P. A., ALLY, MONA S. and ROSENBERGER, C. R. JR. (1956). The number of eggs developed 
related to the quantity of blood ingested in AL;des aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 
49, 435-44 1. 
YOUNG, C. J. (1922). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia calopus Meig. in Brazil. Ann. Trop. 
Med. Parasit. 16, 389-406. 
514 
XXIII 
FLIGHT 
(a) SPEED AND RANGE OF FLIGHT 
SPEED OF FLIGHT 
The speed of flight of a number of insects as recorded in the literature is given by Wiggles- 
worth (1942). This varies in the list given from 06 (Chrysupa) to 15.0 (Sphingids) metres 
per second. Speeds given for the bee vary from 25 to 6-O metres per second and for 
Diptera from 2-O (Musca) to 140 (Tabanus). For further examples see especially Magnan 
(1934), also Demo11 (19 18). In many cases such estimates of speeds have been arrived at by 
observation alone. 
Seen clearly in a beam of light or against a suitable background, estimation of the 
cruising speed of the unfed female Ak’des aegypti has given values between 05 and 1-O metre 
per second (50 and 100 cm./sec.). It is thought that the male has in general a more rapid 
flight than the female. Accurate determination by such method is, however, difficult. 
Observations based on experimental conditions have been given by Kennedy (1940). As 
shown by this author the flight of the female is largely controlled by visual response to the 
background. In a wind tunnel in still air over a background of moving shadow stripes the 
mosquitoes flew in the same direction as the movement, often faster but never more slowly 
than the stripes. In a gentle wind of 40 cm./sec. over a stationary background the mos- 
quitoes made headway and were never carried backwards. A minority of individuals 
temporarily swept in the direction of the wind sometimes turned in mid air and flew up 
wind again. When disturbed the mosquitoes (females) flew directly against a 40 cm./sec. 
wind to settle on the netting on the upper end of the wind tunnel. As the wind grew 
stronger, more and more mosquitoes alighted, those still flying in 100 cm./sec. wind main- 
taining their position until they suddenly alighted on the floor without being carried 
backwards. With winds over 150 cm./sec. they were made to alight and could not take off. 
Kennedy notes that Afridi and Abdul Majid (1938) found that Culex fatigans refused to 
take off in a wind of 10 miles an hour (about 450 cm./sec.). These results indicate an 
average speed of about 50 and a maximum speed of 150 cm./sec. 
The effect of such visual control of speed according to Kennedy would be likely to 
cause the speed to be greater when flying at a distance from the ‘ground’. When close to 
the ‘ ground’ (not above 10 cm.) and with quite gentle winds the speed did not exceed 
30-40 cm./sec. When well up in the air, however, the mosquitoes should be able to fly to 
the limit of their capacity (150 cm./sec.). When flying the length of the tunnel without air 
or stripes movement the average speed was about 17 cm./sec., the highest being 37 and the 
lowest 9 cm./sec. The author terms speed so controlled the ‘ tolerated image movement ‘. 
The flight of males during feeds has some features of interest. The rate of flight is such 
that at 10 inches distance the insects in flight can be glimpsed, but little or no detail made 
out. Flight is backwards and forwards in a plane at an angle of about 20” to the horizontal, 
the head facing upwards in the plane. There does not appear to be any turning for the 
515 33-2 
FLIGHT 
backward movement, though this requires confirmation. If so, this must mean that the 
male can fly at an almost equal rate in reverse. Though the flight is kept up continuously for 
half an hour, should the arm still be in the cage, not all individuals are in flight for such a 
period, as numbers are constantly dropping out, settling on the sides of the cage and after 
a time taking wing again. 
RANGE OF FLIGHT 
Though AL;des aegypti has considerable powers of rapid and directive flight, it is not, like 
certain salt-water breeding mosquitoes and many anophelines, recognised as a species 
having a tendency to travel considerable distances and is largely restricted in its activities 
to haunting rooms of dwellings and such-like places, normally making short flights and 
frequently settling. Soper (1935) notes that though the species may fly long distances in 
exceptional circumstances, its flight is normally limited to within 25-30 yards of its breeding 
places. Hinman (1932) states that the species is incapable of flying more than a few hundred 
yards. Cumming (193 l), dealing with the species in connection with control of yellow fever, 
gives flight (dispersal) as 400-1000 metres. Shannon and Davis (1930) also state that 
A. aegypti is capable of sustained flight over water of 1 kilometre. A good summary is given 
by Whitfield (1939). 
Dispersal as shown by capture of stained liberated mosquitoes is much less than some of 
these estimates. Shannon and Davis released 20,000 stained specimens in a small village. 
Two were recovered in houses more than 300 metres away and ninety-five at smaller 
distances. Less than O-4 per cent were recovered, the latest capture being 13 days from time 
of liberation. Shannon, Burke and Davis (1930) liberated 3500 stained mosquitoes in one 
house. Dispersion to other houses began within 24 hours. By the end of a week over 
90 per cent had disappeared from the house of release. At the end of two weeks less than 
1 per cent were found. Bonnet and Worcester (1946), in Hawaii, give the result of capturing 
marked A. albopictus, a species of somewhat similar habits to A. aegypti. They found the 
maximum distance covered in 21 days to be 232 yards, the mean distance for all captures 
being 68.7 yards. In 5 days the mean distance was 36.3 yards, in 10 days 113.8 yards and 
in 15 days 103 yards. Wind had little effect, the insects flying into the wind when velocity 
was low; otherwise they clung to vegetation. Wolfinsohn and Galun (1953) liberated 28,000 
laboratory bred gravid females towards evening in an area in Palestine free from wild 
A. aegypti or of dwellings likely to cause attraction and searched for eggs in 150 jars. They 
found eggs laid up to 2.5 kilometres from the liberation point, all within 45” of the direction 
of the wind. 
METHODS USED IN MARKING MOSQUITOES FOR DISPERSAL STUDIES 
The chief difficulty in determination based on liberation of marked mosquitoes has always 
been (1) the very small numbers recaptured, and (2) the unknown extent of possible lethal 
action of the means taken for marking. The most commonly used method of marking 
has been that first used by Zetek, namely dusting of the mosquitoes with aniline dyes, some 
of which were clearly harmful. Shannon and Davis found spraying with 1 per cent gentian 
violet caused death, but 1 per cent methylene blue was used successfully. Griffiths and 
Griffitts (193 1) used a 2 per cent water solution of yellowish eosin distributed by an 
atomiser. Bonnet and Worcester have experimented with auramine 0, pyrazol red, gentian 
violet, malachite green, methyl orange, toluidine blue, chloramine red and pyrazol violet. 
SPEED AND RANGE 
Chloramine red was the only one that proved successful. See also Clarke (1943 a, b), Eyles 
and Bishop (1943). 
To avoid toxic effects Majid (1937) used a metallic marking. Mosquitoes not exceeding 
200 are transferred to a small lamp shade (6+ inches high by 3 inches diameter opening at 
base), the top and bottom closed by netting. ‘ Gold’ powder, as used in Press work for 
decorative writing was then insufflated by a dusting tube made from a corked 3 x 1 inch 
specimen tube fitted with a rubber ball bellows and inlet and outlet tubing. The marked 
mosquitoes are readily recognised after capture. 
Hassett and Jenkins (1949) use radio-active phosphorus, third and fourth instar larvae 
being transferred to culture medium containing 10 pt./ml. radio-active phosphorus (P”“). 
Second instar larvae reared in culture fluid containing Na,HP320 in from 0.05 to 10 ,x./ml. 
were all greatly retarded in development, but at 1 pt./ml. adults emerged after 15 days and 
varied in radioactivity from 6761 to 10,132 cpm. Third and fourth instar larvae in 10 pt./ml. 
begin to emerge in 6 days. For converting curies to grams, etc., see Morgan (1947). 
Bugher and Taylor (1949) also used radiophosphorus and radiostrontium (Srag) as 
Na,PO, and SrCl,. Use of 10-20 radioactive mpc. per C.C. in the larval bath gave a radio- 
activity of 2-16 mpc., using 5 larvae per C.C. There was no absorption by pupae. In the 
mosquitoes 40 per cent of radioactive substance was in the legs, practically none in the 
wings. 
For dispersal of A. aegypti by man see under ‘ Geographical distribution’, p. 41. 
(b) MECHANISM OF FLIGHT 
GENERAL NATURE OF FLIGHT MECHANISM* 
Movements of the wings in flight have been studied, especially in the bee and wasp, by 
(1) observation of the movements of the wing as seen in the dead insect (Stellwaag) ; 
(2) observations made on the stationary insect with the ends of the wings gilded (Marey); 
(3) study of cinematograph records (especially Bull, Magnan and Voss); (4) observing the 
movements under the stroboscope as dealt with in later subsections, and other recent 
methods (Sotavalta, Hocking). 
To a large extent the mechanism concerned in flight is very similar in the majority of 
insects including the mosquito. The main action is the up and down movements of the 
wing brought about through the powerful indirect wing muscles in the thorax acting 
indirectly on the wing by leverage. In addition, to ensure forward progress, the wing is 
also to some degree rotated on its long axis and/or so composed with a thickened anterior 
and more flexible posterior portion that some degree of propeller-like action results. Some 
arrangement has also usually to be made to bring the wings into position for action and for 
flexing and disposing of them when they are not required. 
The wings of the mosquito and the structure of the parts concerned in flight have already 
been described in chapter XIX. It is necessary here only to note how the parts are used. 
What is required of the wings is (1) the main up and down movement, (2) some rotation 
of the wing in its long axis or other adaptation required for progressive flight, and (3) 
* A considerable literature exists dealing with insect flight, see especially Marey (1895), Bull (1904, 1909, 1910), 
Stellwaag (1910, 1916), Ritter (191 I), Voss (1913, 1914), Buddenbrock (1930, review), Snodgrass (1930, how insects 
fly), Magnan (1934), Wigglesworth (1942). Very complete monographs with bibliographies on insect flight are given 
by Sotavalta (1947) and by Hocking (1953). 
517 
FLIGHT 
extension and flexion with adjustment of the wings to the resting position. The part played 
by the halteres and other considerations connected with flight are dealt with later. 
UP AND DOWN MOVEMENT OF THE WING 
Through the structures at its base the wing has the arrangement of a lever, the long arm 
being the wing itself and the short arm the bent down root of the wing. The power is 
applied at the articulation of the wing with the edge.of the scutal flange (Fig. 58 (I), (2), 
(3)JI). With the wing extended, thus bringing the lever system into action, pressure down- 
wards by the scutal flange will cause the wing to be lifted in the upstroke. Similarly any 
raising of the flange by return to its original position will produce the downstroke. It is 
easy to show this effect of the flange by pressing with a needle on the tergum when the wing 
is extended. 
The wing, however, is not free to move in all positions equally. The base of the wing on 
its upper surface ends at its inner margin in an irregular knuckle-like ridge. Between this 
and the edge of the scutum is a deep sulcus, the inner wall formed by the smooth surface 
of the scutal flange, the outer by the downward-projecting base of the second axillary. This 
arrangement limits very largely the wing movement to that on a hinge-like line. It also 
largely prevents movement of the wing upwards beyond a certain point, as will be very 
evident on attempting to raise the extended wing in a freshly killed insect much beyond the 
horizontal plane. It will also be found difficult to extend the wing forwards beyond a 
certain point. This is because as the wing is pushed forwards the free inner end of the costa 
will be seen to engage in the hollow of the tooth-shaped humeral plate (Fig. 57 (8) sep) 
and this in turn to abut against the tegula, movement being further restricted by the limpet- 
shaped sclerite referred to in the description of the parts as the basalare (Fig. 58 (1) bas). 
Only in a backward direction and to some extent downwards after some anti-clockwise 
rotation is the wing free to move in any marked degree. Clockwise rotation, that is rotation 
forwards, is much more restricted. Nor is the lever action of the up and down movement 
entirely a good simile, for the movement of the wing in flight is somewhat vibratory, that is 
the terminal portion of the wing has the appearance in flight of moving through a consider- 
able arc, whilst the basal parts show only very slight movement, suggesting rather what is 
seen with the vibrating limb of a tuning fork. 
ROTATION OF THE WING 
The parts concerned in rotation of the wing on its longitudinal axis are largely the second 
axillary and the remigium. The remigium is a very complex structure. As already noted it 
seems essentially to consist of two partially fused veins, a dorsal radial element more or 
less superposed on a subcostal element, though the parts are far from being merely an un- 
modified continuation of the respective veins in the wing field. These continue basally in a 
normal manner up to the point where the splinter-like articular sclerite of Prashad links 
on the sabroid of the remigium. It is on the two elements of the remigium that the series of 
ridges and hollows described by Shipley and Wilson (19 18) as a possible stridulating organ in 
Anopheles maculipennis occur. These are considered by Prashad to be concerned in rotation, 
the ridges and hollows preventing the two parts of the remigium from moving longi- 
tudinally on each other. If this be so, the poor development of the ridges in AL;des aegypti 
as compared with that in A. maculipennis may be related to the much larger wing and 
518 
MECHANISM 
greater powers of flight in the latter species. That some rotation of the parts in the base of 
the wing takes place is shown by the shift in position of the second axillary (epaulet) on 
manipulation of the wing. 
EXTENSION AND FLEXION 
The folding mechanism of the wing, as indeed its full extension, is in some considerable 
degree at least automatic and due to the structure and elastic nature of the parts. If the 
extended wing be gently pushed back, there is, after moving it to a certain point, a sudden 
jerking back of the wing towards, and even completely up to, its resting position. Similarly 
a touch on the half-closed wings may throw both wings into the completely extended 
position, an action very familiar when mounting mosquitoes. The main ‘joint’ of the wing 
in this movement seems to be the flexible articulation of the remigium with the second 
axillary (epaulet). In the action the connexion is wrenched round and the epaulet rotated 
forwards. When flexing the wing from the fully extended position the free basal end of the 
costa lies anterior to the base of the remigium. But as the wing moves backwards there 
comes a point where the membrane linking the end of the costa to the humeral plate (sub- 
epaulet) slips over the bend made by the remigial joint, thus removing the costa as a bar to 
further bending. The mechanism indeed suggests that did the costa not end freely in mem- 
brane it might well embarrass working of this movement. When the wing is fully bent back, 
that is, fully flexed, the second axillary-remigial joint (epaulet) projects forwards forming a 
kind of knuckle. The free end of the costa then forms an additional small knuckle external 
to this (Fig. 57 (8)). 
The horizontal backward movement of the wing at full flexion is also terminated by a 
kind of locking device. This is largely brought about by the squama. As the wing closes, 
the outer squama merely follows the movement of the posterior border of the wing and 
so comes to lie over the bent-in inner squama. The movements of the inner squama are 
more difficult to follow. In the extended wing the inner squama is bent down in its inner 
half to form a flat depressed area linking on to the axillary cord (Fig. 58 (4), (5) sq). With 
flexion of the wing the greater part of the inner squama is folded back and completely 
hidden beneath the outer squama. So folded, it lies packed away in a hollow behind the 
posterior border of the scutal flange. The folding is seemingly not passive, but accurately 
regulated by the elasticity of the parts to which the sclerites of the inner squama give 
precision in the folding, the elastic border and ribbed axillary cord keeping the edges firm 
and rigid. 
When the wings are fully flexed there is left behind the scutellum a triangular uncovered 
area consisting of part of the postnotum and some portion of the first abdominal segment. 
Over this space the rather long fringe scales at the base of the wing project. On the outer 
squama there are no long fringe scales, thus leaving room for the fringe scales of the 
posterior wing border and the scutellar chaetae. 
As the wings close in they pass very neatly one over the other, slipping into place without 
any interference. It was thought interesting to know whether one wing was always the 
upper one or not, if not, what was the proportion in which right or left wing overrode. In 
thirty-eight females examined at random eighteen gave the left wing over the right and 
twenty the right wing over the left. These mosquitoes were then individually re-examined 
after being allowed to recover from the anaesthetic and fly for a time. This gave almost equal 
numbers in which the overriding wing was changed or was still the right or left as the case 
519 
FLIGHT 
might be. It was also found that it was not necessary that the wing first closed should be the 
covered one. As often as not the second wing to close slipped beneath the already closed 
wing; this without the least hesitation or interference. 
(c) THE HALTERES 
Well behind the wings lie the halteres. The structure of these organs in the mosquito has 
been minutely described by Prashad (Prashad, 1916). They consist of a round knob-like 
head and narrow stalk and a somewhat pyramidal base attached by a linear hinge-like 
joint which allows movement only in a fixed plane. The direction of the hinge-line is very 
close to that of the sulcus and articular ridge of the base of the wing. It follows that the 
halteres, which vibrate through a considerable arc, do so almost exactly in parallel move- 
ment with the wings. When the wings vibrate the halteres do so too, stopping immediately 
the wings stop. This can be readily demonstrated on a female mounted as for the strobo- 
scope or merely pinned through the tip of the abdomen. The nature of the sense organs 
on the base of the halteres is described in chapter XIX when dealing with structure of these 
organs. 
That the halteres are essential to flight in that they allow of co-ordinate movement of the 
insect is now well known. It is not difficult to touch the halteres of an anaesthetised insect 
with a fine needle wet with liquid glue and to fasten them down to the abdomen without 
injury to the insect. Such an insect on recovering from the anaesthetic will fly but in a 
wholly incoordinate manner as will be well demonstrated on a large sheet of paper, the 
insect flying up only to dash itself violently to the ground. 
For information on the function of the halteres and bibliography see especially Pringle 
(1948). 
(d) WING-STROKE FREQUENCY 
THE FLIGHT NOTE 
The wing-stroke frequency in insects has been studied by a number of observers, some of 
whom have given data regarding mosquitoes. In respect to mosquitoes determination of 
the frequency has for the most part been deduced from the note emitted by the insect, or as 
it is commonly called the ‘hum’ of the mosquito. 
Recently a very complete study of flight tone has been made by Sotavalta (1947). The 
method used has been mainly the acoustic method, that is, matching the note by ear. For 
this the author uses a covered glass cylinder 10 by 15 cm. high, through the cover of which 
are fixed the cup of a binaural stethoscope, a thermometer and two glass tubes by which 
temperature and humidity can be adjusted, the latter being read by a small hygrometer on 
the bottom of the cylinder. Two notes may be given by insects under certain circumstances, 
namely the true frequency note (flight tone) and the ‘whining tone’ on the average an 
octave higher. The latter can be elicited by cutting the wings short. It is interesting to note 
that Rudolfs (1922) records a shrill note when certain mosquitoes are subjected to some 
essential oils (angry note). The highest flight notes are given by small midges (up to c”’ 
equivalent to 1046 vib./sec.). They have a proportionately large thorax to allow for the 
necessary muscles. For Culicidae spp. the author gives about 300 vib./sec. for the female 
and 500 for the male. The rate alters with the temperature. The note is also changed by 
520 
WING-STROKE FREQUENCY 
load, by fixing the insect and by fatigue. Goeldi (1905) refers to alteration of the note as a 
result of dilatation of the abdomen by food. In Anopheles Nuttall and Shipley found the 
tone raised in proportion to the extent of gorging. 
Table 40. Recorded flight note and wing vibration per second 
of d#eren t mosquitoes 
Note with approximate corresponding vibrations per second 
r A 
d 
l:l f g 
2;; b ’ 
2c56 d’ ’ 
3;2 f’ g’ ’ 6’ n d” 
143 171 192 241 287 342 384 4;7 483 5f2 574 n 
6i4 Species 
Anopheles 
maculipennis (2) 
maculipennis (4) 
maculipennis (7) 
punctipennis (4) 
Theoba Idia 
annulata (1) 
SPP. (7) 
A t?des 
aewpti (3) 
SPP. (7) 
Culex 
pipiens (1) 
pipiens (7) 
~PP. (6) 
Culicidae 
SPP. (7)* 
SPP. (7)1 
SPP. (5) 
Anopheles 
maculipennis (2) 
maculipennis (7) 
Theobaldia 
annulata (1) 
SPP. (7) 
AL;des 
aegypti (3) 
SPP. (7) 
Culicidae 
SPP. (7)* 
SPP. (7)T Female 
- - - - - X X X x------ 
- - - - - - - - X 
- - - - - - 
X X X X X - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - 
X - 
X - 
X - 
X - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - X 
X - - - - - - 
X X X X - - - - - - - - - - 
-------------- x - 
- X X x_-_-_--_--__x x--- 
- - - - _ X X X x------- 
X X X X X X X X X x-----_- 
- - - X X X X X X X x----- 
- - - - _ - _ x-------_- 
Male 
------_-__- )(---- 
- - - - - _ _ _ x-----_-_- 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - X 
- X X X X X - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - 
X - 
X - 
X X 
X - 
X - 
X - 
X - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
X - 
X - 
X - 
X - 
X X 
X X 
X - 
X - - - - - - - 
(1) Landois (1867). (2) Nuttall and Shipley (1902). (3) Goeldi (1905). (4) Weber (1906). (5) Howard et al. (1912). 
(6) Voss (1913, 1914). (7) Sotavalta (1947). * In nature. 7 Under different temperatures, 7-39” C. 
In Table 40 are given the notes recorded by different observers for various species of 
mosquitoes. In the table, in order to give a general figure for Culicidae, the frequencies, 
whether given by the author as notes or as vib./sec. are entered as crosses covering the 
range recorded. For exact details, references should be consulted in original. The alloca- 
tion of frequencies to the notes is on the basis of the scale given below. It will be evident 
from the table that, excluding the very high notes given by Landois (possibly the whining 
notes) the extreme range for the female mosquito extends through about the two octaves 
c to C” (128-512 vib./sec.), the more usual records being from f tof (170-340 vib./sec.). 
521 
FLIGHT 
For the male the range is between b and d” (240-570). The large species (Theobaldia) tend 
to give a lower note. The only author giving data for kdes aegypti is Goeldi (1905) 
who records c’ for the female and a’ for the male, or about 256 and 430 per second 
respectively. 
It is perhaps desirable to give a brief explanation of the notation system which to a non- 
musician is apt to be confusing. For an account of the different systems see Catchpool and 
Satterly (1944). Middle octave notes are recorded as c, d, e, f, g, a, b, those of the next 
higher octave as c’ - b’ and for the still higher octave c” - b”, the octave below the 
c - b being given as capitals. In relation to the written clefs the note for the first line of 
the treble clef is e, that for the third space from the bottom being cf. In the bass clef the 
top line is A, one line above being c (Fig. 62 (5)). The exact number of vibrations corre- 
sponding to these notes differs according to the standard of pitch in use, C” in English 
concert pitch being 546, in the Old Philharmonic 540 and in the tonic sol-fa 507. For 
ordinary scientific purposes C” is commonly taken as 512 which gives convenient numbers 
(powers of 2). The notes intermediate between the octave notes are also somewhat de- 
pendent upon the scale in use. But the usual equal-tempered scale is based on the series 
1, 22112, 24112, 25112, 27/l”, 29112, 211/12, 2, or in actual figures in the proportions, 1, 1.122, 
l-260, 1.388, 1*498, 1.682, 1888, 2. Using these proportions and approximate figures the 
value of the notes likely to be required in the present connection will be as follows: 
c d e f g a b 
Lower octave (c) 128 143 161 171 192 213 241 
Middle octave (c’) 256 287 322 342 384 427 483 
Upper octave (c”) 512 574 644 
These figures have been used in the table, any notes recorded as flats or sharps being 
given under the note. 
Notes can be obtained, sometimes of great strength, by confining mosquitoes in tubes 
about an inch in diameter and of different lengths closed with a piece of large mesh 
mosquito netting held in place with a rubber band. The note is best taken when the mos- 
quito is flying near the netting, that is at the mouth of the tube. The tubes are advantageously 
placed on a sounding board. A powerful note, for instance, is given by the newly gorged 
female A. aegypti when segregated in this way in a 3 by 1 inch specimen tube. The note 
calculated at a wavelength of four times the length of the tube,* the rule for a closed tube, 
should be at 25” C. 1151 vib./sec. Actually it was thought to be about middle g or about 
380 vib./sec. In such cases the note heard may not be the fundamental but some harmonic 
of this, indicating a possible serious source of error in deducing vibrations from the note. 
See also Nuttall and Shipley (1902), who while giving the male note as 880 consider this 
possibly an overtone and that the real vibration rate was 440. See also Hannes (1926) who 
found in the bee that the wing gave rise to two pressure waves, thus doubling the note 
frequency but not the wing beats. It should be noted that by frequency, when speaking of 
wing beats, is meant the double vibration, that is down and up stroke counted as one. 
Other methods than that of the note emitted are available for determining the wing beat, 
namely (1) in the case of a large insect recording on a blackened drum, (2) observation with 
the stroboscope, and (3) use of the oscillographic method. 
* The number of vibrations per second is given by velocity of sound divided-by length of wave (in this case 
12 inches). The velocity of sound at 0” C. is 33,170 cm./sec., 54 cm. (1.8 feet) being allowed for each degree of rise 
in temperature. One-third of the diameter of the tube is added to the length of wave (four times the tube length) 
as a correction. 
522 
WING-STROKE FREQUENCY 
STROBOSCOPIC OBSERVATION 
Very valuable observations on flight mechanism and wing stroke frequency can be made by 
the use of the stroboscope (see Chadwick, 1939 ; Williams and Chadwick, 1943 ; Laird, 1948). 
When the instrument is adjusted to near the wing vibration (or its harmonics) the wings 
appear in slow motion, every movement under the binocular being clearly displayed. The 
stroboscope can also be used to determine the wing stroke frequency, since the points at 
which the wing is seen stationary or in slow movement as registered by the instrument gives 
the frequency, or harmonics of this, at those breaks in the light corresponding to move- 
ments of the wing. For such observations Laird (1948) uses a mosquito which, after being 
lightly anaesthetised, has been mounted on a suitably bent piece of wire with a minute 
portion of quick-drying cement at its end pressed against the front of the mesonotum 
(Fig. 62 (I), (2)). It is important that the wire be so placed that it does not enter the field 
of vibration of the wings or affect the position assumed by the legs during flight. When 
under observation the legs must not be allowed to touch any support or the wings will 
cease to vibrate. Where observations are to be made on the effect of different gases, 
temperatures, etc., Williams and Chadwick mount such insects on a supported strip 
inserted into a length of Pyrex tube provided with a tap at each end. 
The instrument available to the present author has been the Stroboflash, type 1200 A, 
made by the Daws Instruments, Ltd., Harlequin Avenue, Great West Road, Brentford, 
Middlesex. The duration of the flash is given as 5-10 micro-seconds. The maximum number 
of vibrations on the scale is 14,600 per minute (about 240 per sec.), readings being given 
in hundreds. For any higher rate it is therefore necessary to use the lower harmonics of 
such rate, this explaining why in what follows it has been necessary to deduce the number 
of vibrations from the harmonics instead of arriving at these directly from the readings. 
Whilst in use the mosquito can be studied under the low-power binocular placed near the 
face of the instrument in a darkish room or even roughly shaded from too much extraneous 
light by a dark cloth or other device. I am much indebted to Mr C. H. Moore of the 
Zoological Laboratory, Cambridge, for instruction in its use, as also for help in respect to 
the observations on the oscillograph given in the next subsection. 
For mounting, an ordinary quick-drying cement as sold for mending glass, china, etc., 
considerably diluted (l-10) with solvent (ethyl acetate) worked very well. But it was found 
that on a thin wire the diluted cement tended to collect, due to capillarity, in a drop above, 
instead of at, the actual end, whilst a thicker wire was clumsy. Much better results were 
obtained by using a long, thin bent entomological pin, such as is used for mounting 
Lepidoptera. The rounded head of the pin when touched in the diluted cement maintained 
a terminal film that adhered readily to the mesonotum giving a minimum but effective 
area of cemented contact. Insects so mounted would frequently continue to vibrate the 
wings without cessation for an hour or more, provided their tarsi did not contact any solid 
body. The best results were obtained when the insects were originally very lightly anaes- 
thetised using the collecting tube with funnel for giving a graduated dose as described in 
the chapter on technique. Table 41 gives the results obtained, the readings being repeated 
approximately on several occasions. 
The readings given in the table are those of the scale on the instruments, namely vibra- 
tions per minute/loo. The figures for ratios give in each case the ratio to the figure next 
below, for example, the first entry in the table is 1 lo/73 = 1.5 1. Now the true number of 
523 
FLIGHT 
vibrations with its harmonics are in the proportions 1, l/2, l/3, etc. and these treated as 
above for ratios give 2, 15, 1.33, 1.25, etc., the first harmonic being 15. The figures in the 
first column of the table are therefore clearly not the actual vibrations, but the first har- 
monics of these and the real number of vibrations, as given in the last column of the table, 
are twice this. The number of vibrations for the female is therefore 367 at 18” C. and 
427 at 25” C. That for the male at 18” C. is 467. The corresponding notes would be g’, 
a’ and b’. Since the determinations have been made on the fixed insect, they might be 
expected to be somewhat higher than for the free flying mosquito, the rate for the fixed 
insect according to Sotavalta being that for an insect with maximum load (see also Roth, 
1922). 
Table 41. Readings (vibrations per minute/ 100) when wings appeared stationary 
or nearly so with ratios as explained in the text 
Sex 
Female 
Female 
Female 
Male Tempera- 
ture 
(” C.> r 
18 Readings 
Ratios 
21 Readings 
Ratios 
25 Readings 
Ratios 
18 Readings 
Ratios 110 
1.51 
115 
1.44 
128 
l-51 
140 
1.47 First 
Readings and ratios harmonic Vib./sec. 
* , vib./sec. wing 
73 53 40 33 183.5 367 
1.33 1.25 1.20 - 
80 - - - 191.7 383 
- - - - 
85 60 48 40 213.3 427 
1.42 l-25 1.20 - 
95 70 56 46 233.3 467 
1.36 1.25 1.22 - 
During such observations it was noticeable that as a rule the vibration rate was not 
throughout always entirely uniform, there being periods of ‘ blur’ indicating temporary 
changes in the rate. 
At those points at which the wings appeared stationary, or nearly so, the halteres also 
came into view moving synchronously in slow movement with the wings. They moved 
through a considerable arc, nearly touching the abdominal surface at each end of the 
swing. 
OSCILLOGRAPHIC OBSERVATION 
Another method open to the study of frequency is the use of a mosquito mounted as before 
and set with the pin carrying the mount against a crystal as used for wireless, the vibrations 
being projected and studied on the screen of the oscillograph. When so connected in circuit 
a female A. aegypti showed smaller waves imposed on the 50 cycle per second waves of the 
normal supply. These smaller waves numbered about 8 to the cycle, indicating a value of 
about 400 vib./sec. Oscillographic observation therefore confirms the order of about 350- 
400 vib./sec. for female A. aegypti independent of any question of harmonics. For a useful 
small guide to the oscillograph see The Cathode-Ray Tube Handbook by S. K. Lewer, 
Pitman and Sons, Ltd., London. 
MATHEMATICS OF FLIGHT 
That there is a relation between the weight of the insect and the number of wing strokes 
and also between these and the area of the wing has been noted by several observers. Thus 
for Culex pipiens Prochnow (1907) gives 
Weight 4-O mg. 
Wing area 1 l-0 mm.2 
Wing length 5-l mm. 
524 
WING-STROKE FREQUENCY 
Magnan (1934) gives an index, usually about 1.5 (varying between 0.7 and 2-2) for length 
of wing (in metres) multiplied by vibrations per second. If this held good for AL;des aegypti, 
and taking the wing length as 3.40 mm. and vibrations as 360, the index would work out as 
1.22 which would conform to the relation. 
A very complete study of the mathematics of flight in insects is given in the mono- 
graph by Sotavalta (1947) and subsequent papers (1952-1955). 
(e) OTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE WINGS IN FLIGHT 
Interesting observations on the movements of the wings can be made on mosquitoes 
mounted as described. In such a mosquito raised so that the tarsi are not in contact and 
examined by unaided eye or under the low-power binocular the extent and direction of 
movement of the wings can be to a large extent determined by the ‘blur’ made as the 
wings vibrate. Viewed from in front or behind, this blur is triangular. It is at once clear 
that the extent of movement in the mosquito is far less than that figured in text-books for 
such insects as the wasp. By means of a micrometer scale in the eye-piece, the length of the 
wing and the extent of the vibratory movement can be measured. The extent varies some- 
what in different insects and at different times, but is on the whole reasonably constant. 
Taking the precaution to measure the excursion accurately in its plane of movement this 
for a normal sized female in good condition is about 2.5 mm. Since the wing length is 
about 3.5 mm., this gives an angle of about 45” (sine about O-7), or possibly slightly less 
since the extent of the blur may be slightly increased as the effect of some rotation of the 
wing on its long axis. 
Since the wings are articulated not very far below the level of the dorsum of the thorax 
the insect with vibrating wings viewed from in front or behind gives the appearance shown 
in Fig. 62 (4), that is rather like an aeroplane with high-level wings. The extent of the stroke 
appears to be about the same above and below the horizontal line through the bases of the 
wings. 
Viewed from above it is seen that the wings when vibrating are not set accurately at 
right angles to the body but are sloped somewhat backwards, the angle which the two wings 
make with each other being about 140”. 
Viewed from the side this latter fact, as also the relatively high position of the wings, is 
very evident (Fig. 62 (2)), the blur of the wings in movement being directed backwards and 
upwards in much the direction that the proboscis is directed forwards and downwards. 
In estimating the degree to which the wings are directed forwards at the end of the stroke, 
much depends upon the attitude adopted by the insect when flying. If the insect is poised 
with the abdomen horizontal, the wings would be working almost exactly up and down. 
But with the body tilted as it appears to be when flying there would be considerable forward 
movement during the down stroke, much as is depicted by Stellwaag for the bee (see also 
Wigglesworth, 1942, p. 89). 
This raises a curious point, which at first might seem to point to some error in the 
observations, in that if the downstroke is directed forwards this should, like a man rowing, 
propel the insect backwards. After noting this apparent discrepancy I have been informed 
by Dr Sotavalta that several observers have noted this fact and that the downstroke acts 
in sustaining the insect, it being the upstroke that propels the insect forwards. 
Much information on subjects touched upon above and others relative to insect flight, 
525 
FLIGHT 
including references to the mosquito and midges and to recent authors’ works, will be found 
in later papers by Sotavalta than that given in the text above. These are given with the 
titles in the list of references. They include those concerned with wing-stroke frequency and 
various factors, such as temperature, air pressure and other matters in relation to this 
(1952a, b; 1953) ; a very useful paper on reserves and energy output (1954a) with one 
giving a description of a simple energy mill (1955); two on muscle structure and thoracic 
temperature (19543, c); and one on the source of sensory impulses (19544. See also 
Haufe (1954). 
512 
256 
128 
128 -c- 
4 
Figure 62. Flight. 5 
A female ACdes aegypti as seen under the stroboscope showing attitude when, from the tarsi 
making contact or other cause, flight movements have ceased. Freehand drawing. 
The same specimen when in the act of flight. The area of the moving wings is only approxi- 
mately indicated. 
The same mosquito viewed from the dorsal aspect showing: a, upper limit of movement of the 
wing; b, lower limit of same. 
Wing movement with the mosquito tilted to bring the plane of movement horizontal, that is 
showing maximum excursion. a, upper limit of movement of wing; b, lower limit of same. 
The angle between a and b as determined from camera lucida drawing is 45”. The lines indicate 
the sine (approx. O-7). 
Treble and bass clefs showing notation and corresponding vibrations of c, c’ and c”. For 
intermediate values see text. 
526 
FLIGHT 
(f> ATTITUDE IN FLIGHT 
When an insect, mounted as for stroboscopic observation, is placed so that the tarsi do 
not touch any support, it frequently happens that the wings will vibrate for short periods 
followed by others in which they are folded as at rest. In a normal insect any intermediate 
state is unusual or at the most of momentary duration. In the two states the arrangement 
of the legs is entirely different. When the wings are closed the legs usually are held more or 
less hanging down, either motionless or to a certain extent moving about. The halteres like 
the wings are motionless, their tips usually just visible beneath the costal edge at about the 
humeral cross vein. When the wings are erected and vibrate the whole appearance of the 
insect changes. The fore-legs are brought up in a very characteristic way and the mid- and 
hind-legs raised and held straight out more or less approximated to the abdomen so that 
their tips lie beyond and behind this structure. In other words the insect adopts what 
amounts to a stream-line attitude. This is particularly striking in the case of the fore-legs. 
These are sharply bent with the tibiae closely approximated to the femur which latter is 
held close against the thorax, the tarsus being raised somewhat in a praying attitude, 
being directed upwards and forwards in a curve roughly parallel with the antennae. As 
the wings stop, all this changes, the legs dropping, to be raised again when the wings restart 
vibrating. It is not necessary that the stroboscope should be used to see these changes 
which can be readily seen under the binocular or with the unaided eye. 
If an insect, mounted as for the stroboscope, be held, not in the usual position, but 
markedly sideways, it usually stops vibrating the wings and scrambles with its legs, and this 
even if the change be made quite slowly. It has already been noted that A. aegypti when 
at rest is sensitive to changes in orientation and tends to re-orient itself if the displace- 
ment is at all appreciable. The same sensitiveness is associated with attitude during 
flight. Some trials with complete reversal, that is with the insect held completely upside 
down, showed that the wings in this case might sometimes continue to vibrate. In all 
other cases there was strong objection to vibrating the wings in a position at a marked angle 
to gravity. For reference to attitude of insects in flight see Poujade (1884), Stellwaag (1916), 
also chapter XVII (f) on specific gravity of the imago. 
REFERENCES 
(a) SPEED AND RANGE OF FLIGHT 
AFRIDI, M. K. and ABDUL MAJID, S. (1938). Dispersion of Culex fatigans. J. Malar. Inst. India, 
1, 155-68. 
BONNET, D. D. and WORCESTER, D. J. (1946). The dispersal of Aedes albopictus in the territory of 
Hawaii. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 26, 465-76. 
BUGHER, J. C. and TAYLOR, M. (1949). Radiophosphorus and radiostrontium in mosquitoes. 
Preliminary report. Science, 110, 146-7. 
CLARKE, J. L.’ (1943a). Studies on the flight range of mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 36, 121-2. 
CLARKE, J. L. (1943 b). Flight range and longevity of mosquitoes dusted with aniline dye. N.J. 
Mosq. Exterm. Ass. Proc. 30, 227-34. 
CUMMING, H. S. (1931). Present day problems of yellow fever. Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 46, 361-6. 
DEMOLL, R. (1918). Der Flug der Znsekten und der ViigeE. Jena. 
EYLES, D. E. and BISHOP, L. D. (1943). An experiment on the range of dispersion of Anopheles 
quadrimaculatus. Amer. J. Hyg. 37, 239-45. 
527 
FLIGHT 
GRIFFITHS, T. H. D. and GRIFFITTS, J. J. (1931). Mosquitoes transported by airplanes. Staining 
methods used in determining their importation. PubZ. HZth Rep. Wash. 46, 2775-82. 
HASSETT, C. C. and JENKINS, D. W. (1949). Production of radioactive mosquitoes. Science, 110, 
109-10. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1932). The water breeding and activity of Culicine mosquitoes at New Orleans. 
(30” N. Lat.) Amer. J. Trsp. Med. 12, 263-71. 
KENNEDY, J. S. (1940). The visual response of flying mosquitoes. Proc. 2002. Sot. Lond. A, 109, 
221-42. 
MAGNAN, A. (1934). Le vol des insectes. Hermann et Cie, Paris. 
MAJID, S. ADBUL (1937). An improved technique for marking and catching mosquitoes. Rec. 
Malar. Surv. India, 7, 105-7. 
MORGAN, K. Z. (1947). Tolerance concentrations of radio-active substances. J. Phys. Chem. 51, 
984-1003. 
SHANNON, R. C., BURKE, A. W. and DAVIS, N. C. (1930). Observations on released Stegomyia 
aegypti (L.) with special reference to dispersion. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 10, 145-50. 
SHANNON, R. C. and DAVIS, N. C. (1930). The flight of Stegomyia aegypti (L.). Amer. J. Trop. 
Med. 10, 151-6. 
SOPER, F. L. (1935). El probleme de la fiebre amarille en America. BoZ. OJc. Sanit. Pan-Amer. 14, 
no. 3, 203-13. 
WHITFIELD, F. G. S. (1939). Air transport. Insects and disease. Bull. Ent. Res. 30, 365- 
442. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2 (see also many later 
editions). Methuen and Co., London. 
WOLFINSOHN, M. and GALUN, R. (1953). A method for determining the flight range of Ad;des 
aegypti (Linn.). Bull. Res. Coun. Israel, 2, 433-6. 
ZETEK, J. (1913). Determining the flight of mosquitoes. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 6, 5-21. 
(b-f) FLIGHT MECHANISM 
BUDDENBROCK, W. VON (1930). Der Flug der Insekten. In Handbuch der normalen und patho- 
Zogischen Physiologic, 15, 349-61. 
BULL, L. (1904). Mkchanisme du mouvement de l’aile des insectes. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 138, 
590-2. 
BULL, L. (1909). Recherches sur le vol de l’insecte. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 149, 942-4. 
BULL, L. (1910). Sur les inclinaisons du voile de l’aile de l’insect pendent le vol. CR. Acad. Sci., 
Paris, 150, 129-31. 
CATCHPOOL E. and SATTERLY J. (1944). Text Book of Sound. Ed. 6. Univ. Tutorial Press, 
London. 
CHADWICK, L. E. (1939). A simple stroboscopic method for the study of insect flight. Psyche, 46, 
l-8. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). OS mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Para. 
HANNES, F. (1926). Bienenflugton und Fliigelschagzahl. BioZ. ZbZ. 46, 129-42. 
HAUFE, W. 0. (1954). The effects of atmospheric pressure on the flight responses of AL;des 
aegypti (L.). Bull. Ent. Res. 45, 507-26. 
HOCKING, B. (1953). The intrinsic range and speed of flight of insects. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 
104, 223-345. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (1912). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
LAIRD, M. (1948). A method of securing living mosquitoes to mounts. Science, 107, 656. 
LANDOIS, H. (1867). Die Ton- und Stimm-apparate der Insekten. 2. wiss. ZooZ. 17, 107-186. 
MAGNAN, A. (1934). See under section (a). 
MAREY, E. J. (1895). Le movement. W. Heinemann, London. Many other publications on flight, 
including that of insects. See bibliography given by Sotavalta (1947). 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1902). J. Hyg., Camb., 2, 77-80. 
POUJADE, G. A. (1884). Note sur les attitudes des insectes pendant le vol. Ann. Sot. Ent. Fr. (6), 
4, 197-200. 
528 
REFERENCES 
PRASHAD, B. (1916). The halteres of mosquitoes and their function. Ind. J. Med. Res. 3, 503-9. 
PRASHAD, B. (1918). The thorax and wing of the mosquito. Znd. J. Med. Res. 5, 610-40. 
PRINGLE, J. W. S. (1948). The gyroscopic mechanism of the halteres of Diptera. Phil. Trans. 233, 
347-84. 
PROCHNOW, 0. (1920). Mechanik des Insektenfluges. In Schriider’s Handb. d. Entomologie, 1, 
534-69. 
PROCHNOW, 0. (1907). Die Lautapparate der Insekten. Intern. ent. Zeitschrtft (Berlin). 
RITTER, W. (1911). The flying apparatus of the blowfly. Smithson Misc. CoZZ. 56, no. 12, l-77. 
ROCH, F. (1922). Beitrage zur Physiologie der Flugmuskulatur der Insekten. BioZ. ZbZ. 42, 
359-64. 
RUDOLFS, W. (1922). Chemotropism of mosquitoes. N.J. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 367. 
SHIPLEY, A. E. and WILSON, E. (1902). On a possible stridulating organ in the mosquito (Ano- 
pheles maculipennis). Trans. R. Sot. Edinb. 11, 367-72. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1930). How insects fly. Ann. Rep. Smithson. Inst. for 1929, pp. 383-421. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1947). The flight tone (wing-stroke frequency) of insects. Acta Ent. Fenn. 4, 
1-117 (with 12 pp. bibliography.) 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1952a). The essential factor regulating the wing-stroke frequency etc. Ann. 2002. 
Sot. Vanamo, 15, no. 2, l-65. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (19523). Flight-tone and wing-stroke frequency in insects and the dynamics of 
insect flight. Nature, Lond., 170, 1057. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1953). Recordings of high wing-stroke and thoracic vibration frequency in some 
midges. BioZ. Bull. 104, 439-44. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1954a). On the fuel consumption of the honey bee (Apis meZZiJca L.) in flight 
experiments. Ann. Zool. Sot. Vanamo, 16, no. 5, l-27. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (19543). On the thoracic temperature of insects in flight. Ann. ZooZ. Sot. Vanamo, 
16, no. 8, l-22. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1954c). Sarcosomes from the flight muscles of certain insects. Ann. Ent. Fenn. 
20, no. 3, 145-7. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (19544. Preliminary observations on sensory impulses from insect wing nerves. 
Ann. Ent. Fenn. 20, no. 3, 148-50. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1955). A simple method of studying and demonstrating the energy consumption 
in flying insects. Nature, Lond., 175, 543. 
STELLWAAG, F. (1910). Bau und Mechanik des Flugapparates der Biene. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 95, 
5 18-50. 
STELLWAAG, F. (1916). Wie Steuern die Insekten wahrend des Fluges? BioZ. ZbZ. 36, 30-44. 
VOSS, F. (19 13/14). Vergleichende Untersuchungen tiber die Flugwerkzeuge der Insekten. Verh. 
Dtsch. Zool. Ges. 23, 113-42; 24, 59-90. 
WEBER, S. E. (1906). Notes on mosquitoes. Ent. News, 17, 214-17. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). See under section (a). 
WILLIAMS, C. M. and CHADWICK, L. B. (1943). Technique for stroboscopic studies of insect flight. 
Science, 98, 522-4. 
34 529 CH 
XXIV 
THE IMAGO: 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
(a) REACTION TO LIGHT AND VISUAL RESPONSE 
Though the lateral ocelli of the larva and pupa remain present in the imago they are clearly 
obsolescent and it is improbable that they are functional. The dorsal ocelli, assuming that 
the bodies described in the frontal region of the imago are these, would also appear not to 
be functional. The effective visual organs consist therefore solely of the large compound 
eyes. As previously noted, in Aedes aegypti these are not noticeably larger in comparison 
with the size of the body in the male than in the female, nor do they extend dorsally and 
ventrally more than in this sex. Though, as shown by Kennedy (1940), different portions of 
the compound eyes respond somewhat differently to visual stimuli, there is little anatomical 
evidence of difference and the difference in size of the facets noted by Sh8zo Sat6 (1950) 
in Culex pipiens var. pallens appears to be much less in Ai;des aegypti (see chapter XXVIII 
on measurement of facets). 
A. aegypti in habit is more diurnal than nocturnal and is widely recognised in the tropics 
as the ‘day biting mosquito’. Nevertheless, it shows a marked preference for shade and 
dark corners and in general avoids bright light and open spaces. It will feed, however, 
readily in moderate or bright daylight at any time of the day. In the laboratory it will feed 
readily in complete darkness. This has been found to be so by Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) 
when feeding on the chicken and we have found that it will do so on the human arm and 
so far as could be ascertained with no delay in numbers settling or gorging. 
Response of mosquitoes in general to light is commonly negatively phototactic. Yet 
Holmes (1911) found with Culex pipiens and C. territans that they kept on the side of the 
cage nearest the window or in a dark room followed the light and that tubes can be held with 
the opening away from the light without the mosquitoes escaping. They were still positively 
phototactic after being kept some weeks in confinement. The light reaction, however, was 
mixed, that is, they selected dark corners but at the same time were photo-positive. Some 
species of Anopheles are at night definitely positively phototactic in so far as they will 
settle on an illuminated sheet, for example A. hyrcanus (Stephens and Christophers, 1902), 
or are activated and fly towards a light (Christophers, 19 14 ; Bentley, 19 14), or are seen in 
the morning flying at window panes. Yet the majority of the species are powerfully 
attracted by dark doorways which they enter for day resting places and thus in this respect 
would appear to be negatively phototactic. De Meillon (1937) notes that A. gambiae gave 
both positive and negative reactions to light. Hundertmark (1938) found that by day 
45 per cent of A. maculipennis chose black to various shades of grey and grey to white, 
whereas at night the response was reversed, 62 per cent choosing white. 
The response of Ai;des aegypti to light has been carefully studied by Kennedy (1940), who 
has given the reactions of suspended females to a horizontal beam of light varying in 
530 
REACTION TO LIGHT 
intensity from 3 to 3 100 metre candles. The insects exhibited negative phototaxis, the most 
frequent readings being orientation at 180” from the source of light. Departures from this 
exact angle suggested that the insects did not receive rays falling on the postero-lateral 
parts of the eyes. Very similar results were obtained by Rao (1947) with mosquitoes (Culex 
molestus and Anopheles maculipennis) rendered flightless by clipping the wings. In all 
cases the insects moved away from the light. Observing cages of A&Yes aegypti at different 
temperatures between 19” and 28” C. the writer has found any reaction to light, whether 
diffuse or a beam of artificial light, to be mildly negative phototactic, that is, the insects 
tended to settle on the sides away from the light. But when flying there was no obvious 
drift. Yet in a test tube held as described by Holmes, A. begypti of either sex will keep flying 
towards the light, and though it may escape if the tube is left open too long, in the main it 
attempts to fly through the closed end of the tube. Further, if it does escape it then flies 
towards the window. The reactions of the adult A. aegypti to light are therefore mixed 
and seem more related to some objective of the insect than to an invariable taxis such as is 
so conspicuous with the larva and pupa. The facts might, to some extent, be sumrnarised 
by saying that in seeking to escape the insect flies towards the light, but in seeking a resting 
position it selects situations in the shade. There is another important reaction which will be 
dealt with later, namely orientation and movement towards a dark object or area, especially 
if this be in motion. It was of interest to note on one ocasion that when a beam of winter 
sunlight entered a cage situated well back in a room the mosquitoes, which for some days 
had been normally resting, kept up a continuous flight showing no particular relation to 
the direction of light, that is, they were merely activated. 
That dark objects such as clothes hanging on a wall are attractive to A. aegypti, so that 
in nature they are found often in numbers resting by preference in such situations, is a 
common observation in the tropics. A similar response is displayed in the laboratory when 
a dark object, for example a dark stripe on a pale ground is presented to them. Kennedy 
(1940), using a single stationary vertical stripe, found that the majority of suspended females 
oriented themselves to face the stripe. This occurred with all widths of stripe subtending 
visual angles from 45” to 315”. With two stripes the insects oriented themselves to one or 
other, not to between the stripes. Rao (1947) obtained very similar results with mosquitoes 
(Anopheles maculipennis and CuZex molestus) rendered flightless by removal or fixation of 
the wings. Such mosquitoes moved towards a single dark stripe. When two stripes were 
present movement was to one, not between. Reaction was invariably positive, no matter 
how feeble the illumination, and was effective for stripes as narrow as a visual angle of 8”, 
but not narrower, Stripes directly behind were not reacted to unless they subtended an 
angle of 135” from the front. When one eye was blinded, circus movement took place 
towards the blind eye. If a stripe comes into the field of vision of the functional eye, the 
mosquito, however, turned sharply towards this. The author stresses that there was never 
any indication of positive phototaxis. The mechanics of orientation seemed to be in con- 
formity with current ideas of negative phototaxis. There was no evidence of photohoro- 
taxis (Kalmus, 1937; orientation to light-dark margin). 
Seemingly somewhat opposite to the above Sippell and Brown (1953) found a mirroring 
surface more attractive than a dull one, a black enamelled surface more attractive than a 
flat black one, a silvered mirror more attractive than polished metal. 
531 34-2 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
COLOUR 
How far does Ai;des aegypti distinguish colour? Preference for particular colours has 
usually been determined on coloured cloths. Nuttall (1901) found that with Anopheles 
maculipennis dark blue was preferred to green, yellow, red or white. Le Prince (see Herms, 
1940) found no clear preference with A. quadrimaculatus. The colour preferences of 
Agdes aegypti using coloured cloths has been investigated by Brett (1938). Adult females 
2i days from emergence were used at temperatures between 21.7” and 23.3” C. and relative 
humidity 55-84 per cent. The mosquitoes were in cages about one foot cube with glass 
tops and netting on three sides. The fabrics were introduced stretched over the investigator’s 
hand at a distance of about 0.8 cm. Fifty females were used in each test and the proportions 
settling on each colour as against black and white respectively determined. The author’s 
results arranged in order of contrast to black are given in Table 42 (see also Brown, 1954). 
Table 42. Colour preferences of Aedes aegypti as determined by Brett 
re-arranged in order of contrast to black 
Colour 
Pure white (MgO) 
Yellow 
Light khaki 
Green 
Blue 
Khaki 
Grey 
Heliotrope 
Brown 
Red 
Pure black Proportion Proportion 
Reflection to black to white 
factor (percentage) (percentage) 
100 - - 
48.2 27 50 
40.3 28 45 
9.3 31 59 
7.5 32 58.5 
14.6 32 60 
17.8 35 56 
10.0 40 57 
7.6 40 62 
10.4 43 69 
2.08 - - 
It would seem that in Nuttall’s observations what was being tested was colour pre- 
ference for ‘ settling to rest ‘. In Brett’s case the presence of the human hand close beneath 
the cloth must clearly have acted as a stimulus to feed and what was being tested therefore 
was colour preference for ‘ settling to feed’, possibly a different reaction. In such a case 
it seems certain that the colour choice would be secondary to the urge to feed, the main urge 
being to settle with some predilection for the exact situation modifying this. From the 
table the general trend would appear very largely preference for the colour with the greatest 
proportion of black and least reflection factor, or in other words the greater amount of 
shadow. A somewhat similar condition is commonly observed when feeding on the 
human arm, more mosquitoes settling on the more shaded parts (see also Smart and Brown, 
1956). The choice of dark blue in Nuttall’s series could be explained in the same way. 
Without more evidence of colour selection as apart from the amount of light reflected, it 
would not seem that either of the above series of observations offers definite proof that 
mosquitoes possess colour sense. 
The effect of colour as displayed in different coloured lights has been studied by Headlee 
(1937). Traps with white light (25 watt frosted globe), red light (neon), greenish yellow 
(mercury) and blue (mercury argon) caught respectively 1621, 1096, 582 and 599 mos- 
quitoes, or taking white light as one, in the proportions respectively of 1.0, O-676, O-359 
and 0.369. In terms of energy received the relative attractiveness would have been in the 
532 
REACTION TO LIGHT 
same order 1.0, 6.1, 12.3 and 21*5. Preference for the traps was, therefore, in reverse order 
to the amount of energy given out. The author, however, found that different species be- 
haved very differently in their preference for certain colours of light and the reactions of 
A. aegypti are not given. Recently a study has been made of the comparative attractiveness 
of coloured lights of equal intensity to specific species of mosquitoes by Bargren and 
Nibley (1956), but I have not as yet been able to see these authors’ paper. On the whole, 
it would seem uncertain whether mosquitoes, or A. aegypti in particular, possess a sense 
of colour as usually understood. 
MOVEMENT 
With moving stripes Kennedy found that the mosquitoes oriented themselves towards the 
following edge and were affected by moving stripes up to 90”, following a retreating stripe 
and turning towards an advancing stripe when it passed this angle. Such observations 
when extended indicated the importance of the visual background in the orientation and 
behaviour of the insects when in flight. With free-flying mosquitoes in a wind tunnel 
Kennedy found that females flew consistently up wind, keeping position or making head- 
way so long as a background of stripes moving below was present, but not in darkness. In 
the absence of wind with a background of moving stripes they flew in the same direction 
as the stripes or ahead of the movement. Kennedy considered that the lateral ommatidia 
initiate the responses to light and to moving objects working in a different way from the 
dorsal and ventral ommatidia which are concerned in upwind orientation. Sippell and 
Brown (1953), studying the responses of the female A&&s spp., note that movement nearly 
doubles attractiveness of animals or inanimate objects. 
The importance of visual stimuli from movement, especially of dark objects, will be seen 
from what is said in section (f) of this chapter regarding the means by which A. aegypti 
locates its victim. 
(h) REACTION TO SMELL 
That smell is an important guide to mosquitoes in searching out their prey has been very 
widely assumed. Smell undoubtedly plays a large part in reactions of many insects, for 
example, the blowfly is attracted by putrid odours and fruit-flies by various chemical 
compounds. It is somewhat surprising, therefore, to find that a number of workers who 
have experimented with mosquitoes in this respect have obtained either negative or 
indefinite results with materials that might have been expected to give marked attraction 
through smell. Thus Rudolfs, dealing with species of A&&s, found that sweat and sebaceous 
secretions were little attractive. Sen (1918) found the blood of the goat after shedding 
was not attractive to A. albopictus. Howlett (1910) also found fresh blood did not attract 
A. scutellaris. Reuter (1936) found that acids in human sweat did not attract Anopheles 
maculipennis. Crumb (1922) found mixtures of the components of perspiration and of 
blood produced only faint erratic response from Culex. Van Thiel (1935) found acids of 
sweat unattractive. 
Hackett (1937) considered, however, that Anopheles maculipennis was attracted by the 
smell of cow-dung. Haddow (1942), experimenting in Kenya, by counting the bites of 
Anopheles received by five washed and five unwashed native children sleeping naked in 
clean blankets in similar huts found that the unwashed children received more bites. He 
also thought that dirty clothing acted as an attraction. Some evidence that the olfactory 
533 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
sense plays some part with A&Zes aegypti is given by Lumsden (1947) using closed recept- 
acles with air at known temperature and humidity. Goeldi (1905) found sweat to be 
attractive, but did not exclude the possible effect of warmth and humidity. Human breath 
has been noted to be very attractive which can be very readily demonstrated by breathing 
on the gauze of a cage containing A. aegypti, but the same objection lies that exhaled breath 
is both warm and humid. An olfactory sense in A. aegypti is noted as possibly present by 
MacGregor (193 1) in that the insect is able to determine the nature of a fluid immediately 
the tip of the unsheathed proboscis (fascicle) either touches or comes into close proximity 
to the surface of such fluid, the author concluding that the perceptive sense is therefore of 
an olfactory nature. Even so this would appear to be a reaction connected with the actual 
act of feeding rather than one by which the insect is attracted to its host. 
Willis (1947), using a special form of olfactometer designed to avoid the effect of tempera- 
ture, carried out critical experiments to test the reaction of A. aegypti, among other things, 
to odour of the human arm. The olfactometer was a modification of that used by Hoskins 
and Craig (1934) and by Wieting and Hoskins (1939), in which air is passed through 
warming and humidifying parts and is presented to the mosquitoes as two equal and 
similar gauze covered funnels, the number of mosquitoes clustering on the respective 
gauzes indicating the attractiveness of any odour as compared with a control. In this case 
an arm was inserted in one of two thin celluloid cylinders inserted into the respective circuits. 
Two species of mosquito were used, namely Anopheles quadrimaculatus and AL;des aegypti. 
The authors obtained what were considered to be positive results from the counts, in that 
the numbers on the gauze receiving air coming from the arm was greater than that on the 
control gauze receiving only air of the same temperature and humidity. The counts are 
given in Table 43 (see remarks, however, later). 
Table 43. Results by Willis of observations relating to 
Aedes aegypti and arm odour 
Temperature 
air-stream 
(” C.) 
34 
2426 
36-5 
34 
34 
34 
Schaerffenberg and Kupka (195 1, 1952) claim that blood gives off a volatile substance Air flow 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 Total response Attraction 
Ail- Number w to odour 
exhaust of tests Test Control (percentage) 
300 40 2498 947 73 
300 10 195 180 52 
300 10 463 369 56 
300 10 546 353 61 
200 10 534 380 58 
250 10 420 369 53 
which attracts Culex to feed. This they claim attracts the mosquitoes from a distance and 
can act through a membrane. 
Apart from human scent certain gases and substances have been recorded as attracting 
mosquitoes. Several observers have considered that CO2 had an attractive effect and might 
be responsible for making human skin attractive. As noted by Willis, however, Rudolfs 
does not describe an attractive response to CO, but states that it makes mosquitoes rest- 
less. He found CO, not attractive to A. aegypti at one per cent in air and at 10 per cent it 
repelled. Crumb found admixtures of various amounts of COZ with air bubbled through 
warm water and directed into a cage containing Culex pipiens had no observable effect. 
The attractive effect of CO2 to Anopheles maculipennis atroparvus has been studied by 
534 
REACTION TO SMELL 
Van Thiel(1937, 1947), and by Van Thiel and Weurman (1947), and in respect to different 
species of mosquitoes by Reeves (1951, 1953), some attractive effect being noted (see also 
Dethier, 1954). On AL;des aegypti the effect of CO2 has been determined by Willis and Roth 
(1952) using a small and a large olfactometer. In the small olfactometer a stream of air 
with from 0.1 to 500 per cent CO, repelled most individuals. In the large olfactometer only 
a small number of the mosquitoes participated, but some were attracted. The authors con- 
cluded that at least some females of A. aegypti respond positively to stimulation by CO,. 
It would seem that recently CO, has been regarded as being more of the nature of an 
excitant than an attractant and the idea that it is the cause of females being attracted to 
human skin seems improbable. Another substance found to have some attraction by 
Wieting and Hoskins (1939) was ammonia in concentration of O-012 per cent. At concen- 
tration 0.03 it strongly repelled (see also Laarman, 1955). 
Very numerous volatile substances, on the other hand, repel mosquitoes. How far this is 
through smell or otherwise is not at present known. Some of such substances are not un- 
pleasant to human smell, for example the citronella-like compounds, which nervertheless 
are strongly repellent. 
On the whole the evidence that smell is an important stimulus in the attraction of 
A. aegypti to feed is not very strong. The careful experiments with this species by Willis 
(1947), though they showed some attraction from the human arm ascribed to smell, did 
not indicate any powerful effect such as clearly activates A. aegypti in its normal reaction 
to human skin. Thus it will be seen from Table 43 giving this observer’s results that, of the 
six recordings, two gave only 52 and 53 per cent favouring the arm screen and three only 
56-61 per cent, results quite unlike what might be expected in any experiment where an 
arm, or even a warm object, is offered and where under reasonably good conditions some 
90 per cent of the females in a cage would have been on the attractive object within 
15-30 seconds. 
(c) REACTION TO SOUND 
Hearing in mosquitoes, using the term as indicating perception of air vibrations, so far as 
described, has been mostly in relation to the antennae with their large globular basal 
segment containing Johnston’s organ. Mayer (1874) states that the fibrils of the male 
antenna vibrate to certain notes when the vibrations are transverse to their length, but not 
in the direction of their length. Rotating the stage of the microscope until the fibrils 
ceased to vibrate located the tuning fork to within 5”. The mechanism of locating the 
female was thought to be as follows. The antennae of the male have a range of motion in 
a horizontal direction so that the angle between them can be varied considerably. The 
song of the female vibrates the fibrillae of one antenna more forcibly than those of the 
other. The insect turns his body in the direction of the antenna whose fibrils are most 
affected and thus gives greater intensity to the fibrils of the other antenna. When the effect 
on the two antennae is equal, the insect is pointing in the direction of the female. According 
to Child (1894) vibrations are transmitted by movement of the antenna1 shaft to the 
membrane closing in Johnston’s organ. For a description of Johnston’s organ and related 
parts see under sense organs (ch. XXIX). 
Assuming the above to be correct, it is not clear why the female should possess a 
Johnston’s organ almost as developed as the male, though it is true that the antenna1 
535 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
fibrils are far less developed. The answer might be that, whilst the male antenna may well 
be concerned in detecting the presence of the female, in certain circumstances Johnston’s 
organ has other functions of an auditory nature applicable to both the male and the 
female. 
Many accounts are given of mosquitoes being trapped or killed through use of a buzzing 
or musical note. Shipley (19 15) refers to an account by Howard of an engineer who found 
mosquitoes being attracted in large numbers by the buzzing of a particular electric machine 
and designed a method of destroying the attracted insects by electric contact. The same 
author also refers to an account by Sir Hiram Maxim of a lamp, which, through buzzing, 
attracted mosquitoes, all males. See also Kahn, Celestin and Offenhauser (1945). 
That hearing may play some part in attracting the female mosquito to feed has been 
suggested by Grassi (1900) who noted that people talking were more bitten by Anopheles 
than those keeping silent. Ordinary noises, however, which it was thought might attract 
Anopheles from breeding places to villages, failed to attract in an experiment undertaken 
by the present author and Dr Bentley (Christophers, 19 14; Bentley, 1914) ; these authors 
used a long tunnel with netting closing each end. When a light was shown at one end 
the mosquitoes rapidly flew the length of the tunnel (some yards) and congregated on the 
netting at the lamp end. Noises such as might be expected to originate from habitations 
failed to cause any such response. 
(d) REACTION TO HEAT 
THE EFFECT OF WARMTH 
Howlett (1910) found female Stegomyia to be attracted and excited by a warm test tube. 
Other species of mosquito showed a similar reaction, and he gave his opinion that tempera- 
ture was a dominant factor in the attack of mosquitoes. A similar reaction was later 
described for Anopheles by Marchand (19 18) who showed attraction by glass plates heated 
to 1” C. above body temperature. Howlett’s observations, however, went further than this, 
for he noted that if the tube was inclined the effect was much greater than if held vertically, 
from which he deduced that the effect was not due to radiant heat but to heated currents of 
air. Crumb (1922), under the title of ‘a mosquito attractant’, described the effect of air 
bubbled through warm water and directed through a funnel upon the muslin of cages con- 
taining Culex pipiens. As the temperature rose slightly above that of the surrounding air 
a beard-like appearance was produced due to the mosquitoes being attracted and pushing 
their proboscis through the cloth of the cage so long as the moist current of air flowed. 
There was no specific optimum temperature, but response occurred between 90” and 
110” F. (15-30” F. above the temperature of the surrounding air). At 120” F. (49” C.) less 
interest was displayed, below 85” F. (29” C.) there was very little, if any, response. 
Petersen and Brown (1951), studying the attractive effect of warmth, found that the 
number of female A6!des aegypti attracted to a billiard ball warmed to 100-l 10” F. 
(38-43” C.) was twice that attracted to the same ball 20” F. cooler. Smart and Brown 
(1956), studying the attractiveness to A. aegypti females of the human hand, found the 
hand of warm-skinned Caucasians significantly more attractive than those of cool skinned 
ones. Warmer skins, even if of lighter hue, were more attractive than cool and the artifi- 
cially cooled hand less attractive than the normal hand. Experimenting in the open with wild 
AZdes spp. Brown (1951) found that warmth increased the attractiveness of a robot sothat 
536 
REACTION TO HEAT 
at 98” F. (36” C.) three times as many mosquitoes were attracted as when at M-65” F. 
(10-18” C.). Van Thiel(l935, 1937), when testing the attractiveness of sweat to A. aegypti, 
found none of the sweat acids attractive but warmth was so, and though COz increased 
attractiveness of warm moist air it did not bring about reaction in unwarmed air. 
Another direction in which the effect of warmth is evident is in the need of warmth in 
blood or other fluid as a stimulus to feed. Bishop and Gilchrist (1946), when feeding 
A. aegypti through a membrane, found that it was necessary for effective feeding that the 
fluids behind the membrane should be warm. Further, for effective feeding it was necessary 
to have a difference in the temperature of the fluid and the environmental temperature. 
Their results in this respect are shown in Table 44. 
Table 44. Eflect of d$erence in temperature of environment and fluid in attraction 
to feed of Aedes aegypti (Bishop and Gilchrist, 1946) 
Temperature Temperature 
of of 
environment fluid Difference Number Number Percentage 
(” C-1 (” C.) (” C.) used gorged gorged 
24 24 0 430 26 6 
28 28 0 439 35 8 
31 37 0 393 74 19 
24 42 18 436 224 51 
28 42 14 403 285 71 
Lea et al. (1955) found that temperature played a considerable part in causing A. aegypti 
to feed on artificial media such as titrated blood. For this purpose they used a U-shaped 
tube the two ends of which were outside the cage so that the tube could be kept warm by 
circulating water at 115-120” F. (40-49” C ), the food material being given on cotton 
(without sugar) placed on the tube within the cage. 
That it is the effect of warmth which dominates the behaviour of A. aegypti in being 
attracted to feed is familiar to those using the species in many ways. If into a cage of 
resting A. aegypti is introduced a container warmed to about 40” C. it does not take very 
long before the majority of the females will be clustered about the object in an excited 
manner thrusting with their proboscis as though attempting to puncture and behaving 
generally as they would have done had the object been a human arm. It is easy to show that 
in the case of an arm placed in a cage of the mosquitoes visual attraction is not what is in 
action. If the arm is placed just below a sheet of glass, there is no settling until the glass has 
had time to warm. Then, too, it is easy to demonstrate with a cage of the mosquitoes that 
there is a considerable difference in the rate of settling whether the operators arm be warm 
or cold. When a rubber glove is worn with some of the arm skin also exposed, the mosquitoes 
at first when the arm is introduced settle on the glove as well as the arm. If the glove is thin 
often as many will settle on this as on the skin, only leaving the glove when they find it is 
not giving what is required. 
Not only is there very strong evidence that warmth attracts A. aegypti in a very pro- 
nounced way in the urge to feed, but there has not been described in the literature any other 
attractive influence so active and characteristic in its results. Certain requirements must be 
met such as that the mosquitoes must be of an age to be ready to feed, are not already fed 
on blood or sugar and other common-sense precautions and the conditions regarding 
temperature must be those, as shortly to be described, actually involved in bringing about 
the necessary stimulus. 
537 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
THE FORM IN WHICH WARMTH ACTS AS AN ATTRACTANT 
In the last section it has been noted that for temperature to be effective as a stimulus to feed 
there must be a difference in the temperature of the attractive object and that of the general 
environment. Further than this Petersen and Brown (1951), studying the effectiveness of 
warm bodies to A. aegypti, found that such attractiveness was eliminated by the inter- 
position of an air-tight window that allowed almost all the radiant heat to pass through but 
prevented heat convection. These authors thus concluded that radiant heat in itself was not 
the attractive factor and that heat was effective through the formation of warm convection 
currents, curiously enough what Howlett had shown in his simple experiment with a warm 
test tube. There can indeed be no doubt that the effective factor (disregarding for the 
moment certain visual reactions at a distance discussed later) causing A. aegypti to attack 
to feed are warm convection currents set up by the host. Experience with the species over 
a number of years indeed has shown that this sensitiveness to convection currents is very 
highly developed in the species and amounts almost to a special sense. What sensilla are 
responsible is not at present known, but the abundance of such sensory organs about the 
coxae and associated structures (see ch. XIX (g)) suggests that these might be concerned. 
It is easy to give demonstrations of the sensitiveness to such currents. Thus, if a hand be 
held against the glass side of a cage of hungry A. aegypti, females will soon begin to collect 
in flight, not opposite the hand, but a little way above this where the warm glass has evi- 
dently set up ascending convection currents of warm air. If in a cage the arm be exposed 
enclosed in a box with gauze top and sides, it will be noted that the females congregate 
above rather than at the sides, even if the arm be placed much nearer the sides than the 
top. Again the females settle rapidly on a white cloth stretched a little distance over the 
arm since this gets warmed or allows warm air to pass through. The mosquitoes, however, 
take very little interest in such a cloth without the arm, even if it has been well rubbed over 
the arm, so that it can scarcely be smell that has affected them. The possibility of CO, being 
the attractive factor is not ruled out, but from what is said later this is unlikely to be the 
main reason for the behaviour described. 
Very interesting in the above connection are the results obtained by Mer et al. (1947) on 
the attraction of Anopheles elutus by human beings. These authors summarise their findings 
as follows : (1) the air expired by human beings attracts mosquitoes ; (2) not only expired 
air, but also factors emanating from the rest of the human body (though probably with lesser 
intensity) attract ; (3) in absence of horizontal air movement attraction is exerted in a vertical 
direction, too, the attracting factor probably being carried upwards with the column of 
warm air rising from the human body; (4) the mosquitoes were attracted from distances 
of from 30-330 cm. in an exposure time of 15 minutes. 
Whilst the above authors credit the attractiveness to some content of the air currents it 
clearly might have been the air currents that were the cause of the attraction. Very similar 
experiences are described by Haddow in AL;des simpsoni attacking human beings (see (f>.* 
Whilst, therefore, A. aegypti displays such behaviour in perhaps an unusually pronounced 
fashion, the same effect seems to be very general in mosquitoes. The effect of moisture by 
itself and in combination with warmth is dealt with in the next section. 
It should perhaps be mentioned here that Parker (1948, 1952), unlike most observers, 
* A very comprehensive and thorough study of the common European Anopheles, A. maculipennis 
dealing with host behaviour, is given by Laarman (1955), with an extensive bibliography. atroparvus, 
538 
REACTION TO HEAT 
found in his experiments no attraction from a warm dry object and that a cold moist 
surface was attractive. Since some importance has been attached to these results some 
remarks seem called for. The author’s tests were carried out in an apparatus consisting of 
a tube 15 cm. long by 5 cm. in diameter. The experiments were carried out in a surrounding 
environment, of 25” and one of 28” C., the latter a rather high temperature for such trials. 
The mosquitoes used in each experiment were of mixed ages and included in almost all cases 
those of ages from 2 days, or even in some cases one day, from emergence. It is possible 
that the small narrow tube acted as a closed space and taken along with what was possibly 
not good material gave these unusual results. 
(e) REACTION TO MOISTURE 
Crumb (1922), in his experiments with Culexpipiens, used air bubbled through heated water. 
The attraction observed was, therefore, caused by the warmth or by the moisture or by a 
combination of both. Human breath, which was also observed to attract, similarly has 
moisture and warmth. Crumb used boxes with a hole 2 inches square cut in the lid and 
covered with cheese-cloth with wool behind. When the cloth was moistened with warm 
water mosquitoes were attracted. They were not attracted to an identical box moistened 
with cold water. 
Ordinarily a cold damp object causes no attraction to Ai;des aegypti in the sense of 
attraction to feed. Obviolusly it might attract it to obtain water and it seems desirable here 
to call attention to the need when using the word ‘attraction’ to define clearly what is 
meant. Here the term is applied to a condition in which the mosquitoes are activated and 
actively attracted, characteristically exhibiting hurried prospecting combined with prodding 
when on the attractive surface, that is, briefly ‘attraction to feed’. In a cage provided with 
a moist pot or moist filter paper fan, a proportion of the mosquitoes will always be found 
resting on such an object and in a sense have been attracted. Or mosquitoes may settle on 
a darker part of a cage in preference to a lighter part or on one colour rather than another. 
In none of these conditions do they exhibit the characteristic behaviour of mosquitoes 
‘attracted to feed’. Yet in giving the result of experiments on colour, smell or other condi- 
tions the word attraction, often suggesting attraction to attack, is commonly used for any 
condition where more mosquitoes are found in one place rather than another and where 
possibly something quite different to attraction to feed is involved. With recognition of a 
difference between attraction to feed and other influences bringing about settling it would 
seem that moisture unassociated with warmth plays little or no part in the first. Associated 
with warmth and especially considered as a condition favouring warm convection currents 
of air, moisture clearly may be expected to play a considerable role. How far such may 
depend on a separate sensory stimulus for warm humid air and warm dry air is a matter 
for determination by carefully designed experiment. 
The extent to which humidity at different temperatures affects the biting of A. aegypti 
has been investigated by Lewis (1933) whose results are given in condensed form in 
Table 45. Here both warmth and humidity are concerned. But the mosquitoes in the 
experiments were in a small enclosed atmosphere and the conditions were therefore akin 
to those obtained by Bishop and Gilchrist when there was no difference of temperature 
between the environment and the object and they relate therefore more to the effect of 
539 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
a humid environment on the mosquitoes than on the effect of moisture in the present sense 
as an attractive agent to feed in the open. 
Brown (195 l), in field experiments with female A8des spp., found that moisture on clothing 
increased attractiveness of a warm object 2-4 times when air temperature exceeded 60” F. 
(15.6” C.) but decreased at lower temperatures. Thompson and Brown (1955), studying the 
attractiveness of human sweat, found sweat from the armpits of Canadian males super- 
ficially attractive when tested in the olfactometer if in sufficient concentration. Attractive- 
ness of moist clothing was not increased by addition of simple sweat. Volatile acids from 
sweat had a repellent effect. Smart and Brown (1956) found the hands of individuals with 
low moisture output more attractive than those with high and hands with free perspiration 
less attractive than normal hands. Some determinations by the present author (Christo- 
phers, 1947) using an apparatus designed to measure attraction and repellency are given in 
Table 46. In these there was little effect in substituting wet for dry filter paper pads over 
the attractive warm object (warm container). Reference may also be made to the findings 
of observers that moistening the skin or a membrane with saliva increased, or did not 
increase, attractiveness to feed. The present author has found that moistening the arm some- 
times appeared to increase the rapidity of settling, but no constant effect could be shown. 
Table 45. Number of Aedes aegypti females feeding at d@Eerent 
temperatures and humidities (Lewis, 1933) * 
Relative humidity (percentage) 
Temperature c A -l 
(” C.) 0 60-70 77-88 91-95 
15 - - 0 (27) 
20 - - - 5(37) 
25 6 (34) 12 (33) - 33 (43) 
30 11 (36) 17 (35) - 38 (39) 
35 - - 11 (36) 17 (36) 
40 - - 0 (24) - 
* The figures in brackets are the numbers of mosquitoes used, those not in brackets the numbers that fed. 
Table 46. Index for attraction of AEdes aegypti using wet or 
dry filter paper over warm container 
Position of 
Alignment of filter paper Index Index 
container to container wet dry 
Horizontal Lateral 2.8 2.5 
Vertical Below 2.4 2.0 
Vertical Above 2.2 2.4 
For nature of index see Christophers (1947). 
If, as here suggested, convection currents arising from the object are the chief stimulus 
to attack to feed, it is probable on purely physical grounds that moisture would have some, 
but possibly a variable, effect. It is a well-recognised fact in meteorology that it is the 
presence of aqueous vapour in the air which largely causes columns of air to continue 
ascending, dry air through adiabatic adjustment soon coming to equilibrium. Presumably 
what happens on a large scale may also occur to some extent with such a source as the 
human body. Being invisible, such currents are probably much more extensive than is 
generally appreciated. Haddow (1945), dealing with A. simpsoni, a diurnal species very 
540 
REACTION TO MOISTURE 
like A. aegypti in its habits, notes that it attacks the head and shoulders by preference and 
people standing to those sitting, as also persons sitting to those lying. This is compatible 
with stimulation by convection currents from the warm human body, the bulk of which is 
towards the upper part and currents of which would be more concentrated in an upward 
direction standing than in any other situation. Some further observations on such currents 
will be found in the next section where some observations on A. aegypti in a free state are 
given. 
Perhaps here it may be desirable to note that whilst mosquitoes in general appear from 
the literature to be largely attracted to feed by warmth, it would not be legitimate to 
assume that all species are alike in the degree to which this occurs or in absence of other 
sources of attraction or degrees of such. In many respects A. aegypti is a peculiar species 
in its markedly domestic and in its diurnal habits and even in the way in which in freedom 
it attacks. Whilst therefore the importance of convection currents in its behaviour has 
been emphasized, it does not necessarily follow that this applies to all mosquitoes. Nor 
contrariwise does proof of other factors being more dominant in other species negative 
conclusions drawn regarding A. aegypti. 
(f> STIMULI CONNECTED WITH FEEDING 
It seems probable that a number of stimuli and their responses are concerned with 
A. aegypti attacks and feeds and there may be distinguished as possibly distinct: (1) stimuli 
leading to the location of the victim at a distance; (2) stimuli leading to attack and settling 
to feed; (3) stimulus to puncture; (4) stimulus to suck and pass to the gut. 
From observation of the free insect and what has previously been said regarding its 
reactions it seems probable that A. aegypti, in locating its victim, may be guided in the first 
place by visual response, namely attraction to dark and especially moving dark objects. 
It does not take long for an escaped insect in an ordinary-sized room to be found hovering 
in the initial stages of attack and it is thought that the insect in such circumstances makes 
prospecting flights with periods of rest until, from visual stimuli or the encountering of 
attractive currents of warm air, it comes to recognise the presence of a prospective host. The 
same behaviour is characteristic of males which locate and remain to hover about any 
occupant though they do not often settle and do not bite. 
It is not impossible, however, that apart from any visual stimulus random flight may bring 
the insect within range of warm convection currents. Females liberated one by one at a 
lower corner of a net 6 feet by 3 feet by 6 feet high in a room warmed approximately to 
28” C. were observed to fly upwards at a slant until they approached the netting. They 
then usually coasted at a .height of about 5 feet from the ground slowly along the netting 
or made a diversion across the net. Eventually, usually flying at about 5 feet from the 
ground, they came into the neighbourhood of an observer seated in the net and at once 
when this occurred they made preliminary attack manceuvres, their rapid movements then 
being more difficult to follow. The impression gained was that the first indication of the 
existence of a victim was the presence of an aura compatible with the existence of con- 
vection currents arising from the body as a whole. Usually under these circumstances the 
mosquitoes located the observer within from 4 to 20 seconds. They did so equally when 
he was enveloped in a white cloth (see the very similar account given for Anopheles by 
Mer et al. referred to in section (4). 
541 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
Having located its victim the insect from this time onwards is concerned with ‘settling 
to feed’, taking flights, however, for safety if disturbed and reapproaching over and over 
again if necessary, usually from the dark side. There would appear to be a good deal more 
in the behaviour at this time than merely automatic response to a simple stimulus. If 
seriously threatened by movements of the victim it will usually retire for a time and may 
commonly be found resting on some nearby surface, a feature in its behaviour which often 
enables a particularly evasive pest to be captured, a towel or handkerchief being flapped 
vigorously and the insect then looked for on the nearest wall. It is interesting to contrast 
this caution with the behaviour of a female that has begun to feed and has been interrupted 
in an early stage of gorging. Such an insect then cares nothing for danger and will precipi- 
tate itself recklessly and without caution upon its victim. It was by using such mosquitoes 
that Gordon and Lumsden (1939) were able to get Ai;des aegypti to feed on the web of a 
frog’s foot under the conditions of their experiments. A contrast in the opposite direction 
is seen when the skin is smeared with a repellent. The insect may, if a strong repellent is 
used, remain resting on the cage with no attempt to investigate. Or with a less strong 
repellent it may ‘prospect ‘, giving rise to the curious soft ‘touches ’ which it has been thought 
are due to the trailing hind tarsi (Christophers, 1947). With a weak repellent it may essay 
to feed but leave the arm before gorging, or it may approach from a vantage point, inserting 
its proboscis over the protective edge of clothing or other object. Under normal conditions, 
however, sooner or later the free insect, as it does in a feeding cage, ‘ settles to feed’. It 
may do so on the clothing, much as it does often on the glove in the feeding cage, leaving 
this, if it is not satisfactory, for a place where it can find skin or sense warmth through thin 
clothing. As already noted stimulus to ‘settle to feed’ in a cage is mainly, if not entirely, 
thermal and there is no reason to doubt that it is the same stimulus which causes the free 
insect to attack and attempt to settle where it can feed. 
Bishop and Gilchrist (1946) ascribe the effect of attraction by a warm object to a heat 
gradient. It is not very clear what physical condition would correspond to such a term. 
There would appear to be two conditions relative to heat set up by such a body, namely 
radiant heat and air warmed by contact. The human body is a considerable mass at a 
temperature of about 37” C. usually some degrees warmer than the surrounding air and 
convection currents must inevitably be set up. From facts already given it would seem that 
it is these currents, rather than radiant heat, which form the stimulus. If such a conclusion 
is correct, and having regard to the rapidity and certainty with which the response is 
evoked, the insect must possess what practically amounts to a special sense in this respect. 
In regard to puncturing one might provisionally assume that, having reacted to the 
stimuli which bring the hungry mosquito to settle on its prospective host, there is still a 
further stimulus required to cause the female to puncture. Such an insect will, however, 
even if it cannot reach the skin to puncture it, that is, if stopped from doing so by netting 
a few millimetres distant, will vigorously thrust its proboscis through the netting with all 
the vigour of an insect on the skin though it has not touched this. Further, A. aegypti 
females will persistently prod, as if attempting to puncture, warm glass or other material 
where there can be no other stimulus than a thermal one. It would seem, therefore, that 
the attempt to puncture is part of the same chain of behaviour set up by the original 
thermal stimulus, though this may be completed or reinforced possibly by actual contact 
with the warm body. 
Having punctured, however, there is evidence as already described in ch. XXI (d) that the 
542 
STIMULI OF FEEDING 
taking in or refusal of fluids encountered and their despatch respectively to the mid-gut 
or to the diverticula lies with the insect now to decide. Sen (191 S), dealing with A. albo- 
pictus, a closely related species, considered that though warmth actuates the mosquito to 
bite it does not encourage it to suck. Probably the author came to this conclusion because 
he found that shed blood had no attraction. MacGregor found that in artificial feeding the 
nature of the fluid could be detected through some sense possibly of an olfactory nature 
when it touched or approached close to the end of the hypopharynx, suggesting that the 
two small sensory pits on the termination of this organ have an olfactory or gustatory 
function, there being no other sense organs in this situation. 
(g) STIMULI CONNECTED WITH OVIPOSITION 
The essential requirement for oviposition in the case of A. aegypti is water. Even in captivity 
in tubes females of the species will die before they will lay eggs except on water or a wet 
surface. The behaviour of the female in respect to water finding for this purpose has been 
investigated by Kennedy (1941). As with Anopheles and Culex the only evidence obtained 
of a directed reaction (taxis) contributing to water finding in a small space such as a cage 
was random movement. The behaviour in the three cases, however, differed somewhat. 
Anopheks on encountering water breaks into a hovering flight laying its eggs during the 
‘oviposition dance’ or while settled on the water. Culex stops dead on the water and lays 
its eggs there. AFdes aegypti acts like Culex but with some fidgeting about. As previously 
described, AZdes aegypti, when confined in tubes, remains quiet and at rest until ovi- 
position approaches when it becomes restless and wanders about the tube. According to 
Kennedy the only direct form of attraction was a contrasting dark appearance (black 
paper on a white background) or a reflecting surface (mirror, or covering a dark target 
with glass). Water itself in dishes caused no attraction to Culex at a distance of over 
10 cm., either above or from the side. Actual contact with water was the chief stimulus to 
oviposition. No eggs were laid by AL;des aegypti in absence of such contact. 
It is doubtful, if water is available, whether in the laboratory the fully gravid female 
A. aegypti pays much attention to any particular time of day or temperature for oviposition. 
Macfie (1915) found oviposition had usually taken place overnight before 6-7 a.m., over 
50 per cent of females having laid before 8 a.m. It is to be noted, however, that the night 
hours are very long in proportion to the short hours of the working day, being usually 
double or more. Muirhead Thomson (1940) refers to Buxton as saying that A. aegypti 
oviposits (in nature) at dusk in the morning or evening, or during a dull day and that 
experiments showed that darkness was more attractive than light. Jobling (1937) found 
that A. aegypti would oviposit in complete darkness. 
Haddow (in lit.) has recently given the present author figures obtained as a result of 
hourly counts of eggs laid by A. aegypti in cages in the laboratory of the Virus Research 
Institute, Entebe. The heaviest laying was in a peak period in the late afternoon at a time 
of rather low and rapidly falling intensity of light, 1675 eggs out of a total of 1922 being 
laid between the seventh and thirteenth hour from sunrise. In the present author’s ex- 
perience oviposition has chiefly been in relation to the time at which the mosquitoes were 
fed. No particular difference was noted in the case of isolated females kept in the dark or 
exposed to artificial light. Pots in cages in positions least exposed to light as a rule, how- 
ever, showed heavier egg laying than those in the same cage in a less protected position. 
543 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
In regard to temperature Hecht (1930) found that A. aegypti laid most eggs between 20” 
and 30” C., but the temperature choice was less sharply defined than with Anopheles. 
Oviposition, according to Gutzevich (193 I), does not occur below 16” C. With the present 
author it has taken place at all temperatures between 19” and 28” C., the only difference 
noted being some spreading of the time taken at the lower temperatures. 
There are many references in the literature to the varying attractiveness of different media 
for oviposition by Aedes aegypti. Buxton and Hopkins (1927) found infusions of hay, rice 
or bran very attractive for females in nature. There has never been in our case any hesitation 
of females in captivity in laying on or around clean tap-water. The masses of eggs, 
amounting to 10,000 or more in a pot, were laid on clean water and the pots for technical 
reasons were perfectly clean and free from organic matter and newly placed in position 
after fouling by the pre-oviposition defaecation. More important than the nature of the 
fluid, provided this is not objectionable, is the nature of the receptacle (see under ‘ Selection 
of site for oviposition’, ch. XXII (c), p. 504). 
In regard to salinity Macfie (1915) notes that A. aegypti shows a selective choice for 
tap-water over salt solutions and that females will not oviposit at all on 2 per cent salt, or 
will do so only after much delay. Fielding (19 19) f ound eggs laid on 70 per cent sea-water 
(about 2 per cent salt), but in higher concentrations none were laid. Woodhill (1941) states 
that A. aegypti distinguishes between water containing 5,10,17*5 and 35 parts per thousand 
of salt and will not lay on water containing 35 parts. Roubaud and Colas Belcour (1945) 
note that all types of water, tap, pure, distilled, or diluted sea-water are utilised with no 
particular preference, though eggs on sea-water remained white and the chorion did not 
harden (see ch. VI (d)). Of 17,940 eggs laid 28.9 per cent were on tap-water, 28 per cent on 
3 1 per cent sea-water, 22.2 per cent on 42.6 per cent sea-water, 17-S on 62 per cent sea-water 
and 3.1 per cent on undiluted sea-water. These authors consider that the only influence 
affecting oviposition is hygrotropism, which affects both males and females and apparently 
is governed by a special sensibility of the tip of the 
substances in the medium. Howlett (19 19) found 
attractive effect for oviposition of A. albopictus. abdomen in respect to unfavourable 
sodium citrate and tartrate had an 
REFERENCES 
BARGREN, W. C. and NIBLEY, C. (1956). Comparative attractiveness of coloured lights of equal 
intensity to specific species of mosquitoes. Res. Dep. 3rd Army Area Med. Lab. Fort 
McPherson, Ga. 
BENTLEY, C. A. (1914). Notes on experiments to determine the reaction of mosquitoes to artificial 
light. Ind. J. Med. Res. Suppl. 5, 9-l 1. 
BISHOP, A. and GILCHRIST, B. M. (1946). Experiments upon the feeding of AL;des aegypti through 
animal membranes, etc. Parasitology, 37, 85-100. 
BRETT, G. A. (1938). On the relative attractiveness to Ak;des aegypti of certain coloured cloths. 
Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 32, 113-24. 
BROWN, A. W. A. (1951). Studies in the response of female AC;des mosquitoes. Part IV. Field 
experiments on Canadian species. Bull. Ent. Res. 42, 575-82. 
BROWN, A. W. A. (1954). Studies on the responses of the female Aedes mosquito. Part VI. The 
attractiveness of coloured clothing to Canadian species. Bull. Ent. Res. 45, 67-78. 
BUXTON, P. A. and HOPKINS, G. H. E. (1927). Researches in Polynesia and Melanesia. Parts 
I-IV. Mem. Lond. Sch. Hyg. Trop. Med. no. 1. 
544 
REFERENCES 
CHILD, C. M. (1894). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der antennalen Sinnesorgane der Insekten. 2. wiss. 
Zool. 58, 475-528. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1914). (In discussion.) Ind. J. Med. Res. Suppl. 1, 255. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
CRUMB, S. E. (1922). A mosquito attractant. Science, 55, 446-7. 
DE MEILLON, B. (1937). Some reactions of Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles funestus to environ- 
mental factors. PubZ. S. Afr. Inst. Med. Res. no. 40, 3 13-27. 
DETHIER, V. G. (1954). The physiology of olfaction in insects. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 58, 139-55. 
FIELDING, J. W. (1919). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata Fabr. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 13, 259-96. 
GOELDI, E. A. (1905). OS mosquitos no Para. Weigandt, Para. 
GORDON, R. M. and LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1939). A study of the behaviour of the mouth-parts of 
mosquitoes when taking up food from living tissues, etc. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 33, 
259-78. 
GRASSI, B. (1900). Studi di uno zoologo sulla malaria. Accad. Lincei (5), 3, 299-516. 
GUTZEVICH, A. V. (193 1). The reproduction and development of the yellow fever mosquito under 
experimental conditions. Mag. Parasit. 2, 35-54. (In Russian; abstract in Rev. AppZ. Ent. 
21, 2.) 
HACKETT, L. W. (1937). Malaria in Europe. Oxford Univ. Press, London. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1942). The mosquito fauna and climate of native huts at Kisumu, Kenya. Bull. 
Ent. Res. 33, 91-142. 
HADDOW, A. J. (1945). The mosquitoes of Bwamba County, Uganda. II. Biting activity with 
special reference to the influence of microclimate. Bull. Ent. Res. 36, 33-73. 
HEADLEE, T. J. (1937). Some facts underlying the attraction of mosquitoes to sources of radiant 
energy. J. Econ. Ent. 30, 309-12. 
HECHT, 0. (1930). Ueber den Warmesinn der Stechmiicken bei der Eiablage. Riv. MaZarioZ. 9, 
706-24. 
HERMS, W. B. (1940). In Herms and Gray’s Mosquito Control. New York and London, p. 92. 
HOLMES, S. J. (1911). The reaction of mosquitoes to light in different periods of their life history. 
J. Anim. Behav. 1, 29-32. 
HOSKINS, W. M. and Craig, R. (1934). Olfactory responses of flies in a new type of olfactometer. 
J. Econ. Ent. 27, 1029-36. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (1910). The influence of temperature upon the biting of mosquitoes. Parasito- 
logy, 3, 479-84. 
HOWLETT, F. M. (1919). Report of the Imperial Pathological Entomologist. Sci. Rep. Agric. Res. 
Inst., Pusa, 1917-18, pp. 117-20. 
HUNDERTMARK, A. (1938). Uber das Helligkeitsunterscheidungs-Vermogen von Anopheles maculi- 
pennis. Anz. Schiidlingsk. 14, 25-30. 
JOBLING, B. (1937). The development of mosquitoes in complete darkness. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. 
Med. Hyg. 30, 467-74. 
KAHN, M. C., CELESTIN, W. and OFFENHAUSER, W. (1945). Recording of sounds produced by 
certain disease-carrying mosquitoes. Science, 101, 335-6. 
KALMUS, H. (1937). Photohorotaxis, eine neue Reaktionsart gefunden an den Eilarven von 
Dixippus. Z. vergl. Physiol. 24, 644-55. 
KENNEDY, J. S. (1940). The visual response of flying mosquitoes. Proc. ZooZ. Sot. Lond. (A), 
109, 221-42. 
KENNEDY, J. S. (1941). On water finding and oviposition by captive mosquitoes. BUZZ. Ent. Res. 
32, 279-30 1. 
LAARMAN, J. J. (1955). The Host Seeking Behaviour of the Malaria Mosquito Anopheles maculi- 
pennis atroparvus. Thesis : Utrecht. 
LEA, A. O., KNIERIM, J. A., DIMOND, J. B. and DE LONG, D. M. (1955). A preliminary note on egg 
production from milk-fed mosquitoes. Ohio J. Sci. 55, 21-2. 
LEWIS, D. J. (1933). Observations on AL;des aegypti L. (Diptera: Culicidae) under controlled 
atmospheric conditions. Bull. Ent. Res. 24, 363-72. 
35 545 CH 
SPECIAL SENSES AND BEHAVIOUR 
LUMSDEN, W. H. R. (1947). Observations on the effect of microclimate on the biting of A&Zes 
aegypti (L.) (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Exp. Biol. 24, 361-73. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1915). Observations on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 6, 
205-29. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1931). The nutrition of adult mosquitoes : preliminary contribution. Trans. 
R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 24, 465-72. 
MARCHAND, W. (1918). First account of thermotropism in Anophelespunctipennis with bionomic 
observations. Psyche, 25, 130-5. 
MAYER, A. M. (1874). Experiments on the supposed auditory apparatus of the mosquito. Amer. 
Nat. 8, 577-92. 
MER, G., BIRNBAUM, D. and AIOUB, A. (1947). The attraction of mosquitoes by human beings. 
Parasitology, 38, l-9. 
MUIRHEAD THOMPSON, R. C. (1940). Studies on the behaviour of Anopheles minimus. I. The 
selection of the breeding place and the influence of light and shade. J. Malar. Inst. India, 3, 
265-94. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. (1901). The influence of colour upon Anopheles. Brit. Med. J. 2, 668-9. 
PARKER, A. H. (1948). Stimuli involved in the attraction of Ae’des aegypti L. to man. BUZZ. Ent. 
Res. 39, 387-97. 
PARKER, A. H. (1952). The effect of a difference in temperature and humidity on certain reactions 
of female Aedes aegypti (L.). Bull. Ent. Res. 43, 221-9. 
PETERSEN, D. G. and BROWN, A. W. A. (1951). Studies on the responses of the female Ak;des 
mosquito. Part IV. The responses of Aedes aegypti (L.) to a warm body and its radiation. 
Bull. Ent. Res. 42, 535-41. 
RAO, T. R. (1947). Visual responses of mosquitoes artificially rendered flightless. J. Exp. BioZ. 24, 
64-78. 
REEVES, W. C. (1951). Field studies on carbon dioxide as a possible host stimulant to mosquitoes. 
Proc. Sot. Exp. BioZ. Med. 77, 64-6. 
REEVES, W. C. (1953). Quantitative field studies on a carbon dioxide chemotropism of mosquitoes. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2, 225-31. 
REUTER, J. (1936). Orienteerend onderzoek naar de oorzaak van het gedrag van Anopheles 
maculipennis Meigen bij de voedselkeuze. Proefschr. Rijksuniv. Leiden. Abstract in Rev. 
AppZ. Ent. 24, 223. 
ROUBAUD, E. and COLAS-BELCOUR, J. (1945). Influence de la salure des eaux sur le developpement 
de 1’Aedes aegypti. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 38, 136-45. 
RUDOLFS, W, (1922). See references, ch. XXIII, p. 529. 
SCHAERFFENBERG, B. and KUPKA, E. (1951). Untersuchungen tiber die geruchliche Orienterung 
blutsaugender Insekten. I. Uber die Wirkung eines Blutduftstoffes auf Stomoxys und 
Culex. asterr. zool. Z. 3, 410-24. Also 1952 Trans. Internat. Congr. Entom. 9th Congr. 
Amsterdam. 1, 359-61. 
SEN, S. K. (1918). Beginnings in insect physiology and their economic significance. Agric. J. 
India, 13, 620-7. 
SHIPLEY, A. E. (1915). Insects and war. The mosquito (Anopheles maculipennis). Brit. Med. J. 1, 
331. 
SH~Z~ SAT& S. (1950). Compound eyes of CuZex pipiens var. pallens Coquillett. Sci. Rep. 
TohGku Univ. (4) (Biology), 18, 331-41. 
SIPPELL, W. L. and BROWN, A. W. A. (1953). Studies of the responses of the female Agdes 
mosquito. Part V. The role of visual factors. Bull. Ent. Res. 43, 567-74. 
SMART, M. R. and BROWN, A. W. A. (1956). Studies on the responses of the female Agdes 
mosquito. Part VII. The effect of skin temperature, hue and moisture on the attractiveness 
of the human hand. Bull. Ent. Res. 47, 89-100. 
STEPHENS, J. W. S. and CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1902). Some points in the biology of species of 
Anopheles found in Bengal. Rep. Malar. Comm. Roy. Sot. (6), 11-19. 
THOMPSON, R. P. and BROWN, A. W. A. (1955). The attractiveness of human sweat to mosquitoes 
and the role of carbon dioxide. Mosquito News, 15, 80-4. 
546 
REFERENCES 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1935). Onderzoekingen omtrent den gedrag von Anopheles ten opzichte van 
mensch en dier etc. Geneesk. Tijdschr. Ned.-Ind. 75, 2101-18. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1937). Quelles sont les excitations incitant l’dnopheles mpculipennis atroparvus 
& visiter et g piquer l’homme ou le betail. Bull. Sot. Path. Exot. 30, 193-203. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. (1947). Attraction exercCe sur Anopheles maculipennis atroparvus par l’acide 
carbonique dans un olfactom&re. Acta tropica, 4, 10-20. 
VAN THIEL, P. H. and WEURMAN, C. (1947). L’attraction exerc6e sur Anopheles maculipennis 
atroparvus par l’acide carbonique dans l’appareil de choix, II. Acta trop., Basel, 4, l-9. 
WIETING, J. 0. G. and HOSKINS, W. M. (1939). The olfactory response of flies in a new type of 
insect olfactometer. II. Responses of the housefly to ammonia, carbon dioxide and ethyl 
alcohol. J. Econ. Ent. 32, 24-9. 
WILLIS, E. R. (1947). The olfactory responses of female mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 40, 769-78. 
WILLIS, E. R. and ROTH, L. M. (1952). Reactions of AL;des aegypti (L.) to carbon dioxide. 
J. Exp. ZooZ. 121, 149-79. 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1941). The oviposition responses of three species of mosquitoes (Ai;des 
(Stegomyia) aegypti Linn., CuZex (Culex) fatigans Wied., At?des (Pseudoskusea) concolor 
Taylor) in relation to the salinity of water. Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 66, 287-92. 
547 35-2 
xxv 
VIABILITY UNDER DIFFERENT 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
(a) NORMAL DURATION OF LIFE 
The conditions which mainly determine length of life of Agdes aegypti in the laboratory are : 
access or not to water; low or high humidity; whether fed or not; whether fed on blood 
with resulting oviposition; whether given only raisins, banana or sugar solution. 
The presence of water for the insects to drink is important as otherwise extreme mortality 
may readily occur, even in high humidity. A cage containing about 600 mosquitoes was 
accidentally left at 25” C. and 70 per cent relative humidity, but without water. In this 
cage all mosquitoes were dead in 4 days, whereas there was negligible mortality in two 
similar cages with water. 
A high humidity is favourable even up to approximate saturation (80 per cent relative 
humidity or more) at 28” C. It was found that placing porous pots of water in the incubator 
to bring about an almost saturated atmosphere reduced mortality at time of emergence 
almost to nil and insects at high humidities are very active provided the temperature is 
25” or over. In the absence of high humidity life is much shortened if the temperature is at 
all high. At relatively low temperatures, for example 18-20” C., duration of life, however, 
may often be very considerable even with low humidity and insects may be kept alive if 
given water, even without food, under such circumstances for weeks. At a temperature of 
25” C. and 70 per cent relative humidity with water provided there is relatively little 
mortality among females before the seventh day whether fed or not. Bacot (19 16) gives 
the duration of life under these circumstances without food as averaging 6-8 days, 
maximum 12 days. There is usually, however, considerable mortality in males even shortly 
after emergence, especially at relatively high temperatures (28” C.) and in the absence of 
high humidity. After the seventh day from emergence, mortality among unfed females 
and in males increases rapidly and there is heavy mortality by the tenth day, few surviving 
the fourteenth day at 25” C. even at high humidity and with water provided. A few males 
may be present up to the end. 
If given a blood meal within the first 7 days there is usually little mortality until after 
oviposition, when it may be considerable as at subsequent ovipositions. 
When given regular blood meals or food such as fruit or glucose solution life may be 
very considerably prolonged. Fielding (19 19) gives the following : 
Not fed Lived up to 7 days 
Fed on sugar Lived up to 20 days 
Fed on milk and sugar Lived up to 19 days 
Fed on banana Lived up to 68 days 
Fed on blood Lived up to 93 days 
Bonne-Wepster and Brug (1932), however, state that life is longer where the insects are 
given sugar and water as food instead of blood. In this case there is not the mortality 
548 
NORMAL LIFE SPAN 
following oviposition. Connor (1924) states that 70 per cent of females die after the first 
batch of eggs has been laid. 
Most accounts of very prolonged life relate to females that have been allowed to feed 
on some form of sugary substance or fruit, with or without occasional blood feeds. Such 
records probably almost always relate to some few individual mosquitoes that have 
survived and become conditioned to the environment. Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond 
give for females up to 106 days, males 50 days; survival of one mosquito for 154 days is 
recorded by Guiteras, as quoted by Howard (1923) ; MacGregor (1915) gives females up 
to 4-6 weeks, males 10-21 days ; Macfie (19 15) found no female living beyond the sixty- 
second day, maximum for males 28 days; Bacot gives a maximum of 74 days if water is 
not available for oviposition. Beeuwkes, Kerr, Wetherbee and Taylor (1933) give the 
maximum for females as 131-225 days, with average of 70-l 16 days, and for males 
maximum of 82-135 days with average of 40-61 days. The most detailed data of a statistical 
kind are given by Putnam and Shannon (1934). These authors give two series, namely 
(A) one of 118 females offered frequent and regular blood meals, and (B) one of 190 
females given only honey and water. The longest lived female, was among those not fed 
on blood. The weekly mortality was as follows: 
Weeks 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
A 036 1 10 10 9 12 8 8 12 10 13 7 5 3 1 - 
B 01001030 1 37 41 20 32 12 31 10 0 1 
From these figures it would appear that there was very little mortality among the honey- 
fed mosquitoes until the ninth week when heavy mortality began. In the blood-fed series 
mortality was more uniformly distributed. Since there were more than half as many again 
mosquitoes in the second series, the final result in longevity was not very different. 
Macdonald (1952 a, b, 1957), making an analysis of available data, gives the expectation 
of life of a mosquito (Anopheles) as pn/ - log sp or pn/ - 2.303 log p, using the ordinary form 
of logarithm, where p is the expectation of life through n days, together with a table of 
data as calculated for a number of values ofp from which graphs may readily be drawn and 
interesting effects studied. Some data on survival for Anopheles maculipennis atroparvus 
are also given by Laarman (1955), p. 31. Kershaw, Chalmers and Lavoipierre (1954) 
found that for Ai;des aegypti under laboratory conditions there is a general pattern of 
survival, namely, that the rate of mortality increases with age in such a manner that its 
logarithm is directly proportional to age. This, the authors point out, is in accordance with 
the rate in man in adult life and some mammals, the rate of mortality following the 
Gompertz function (Gompertz, 1825; Gaddum, 1945; Brues and Sacher, 1952). A. aegypti 
were maintained by them at a temperature of 77” F. (25” C.) and relative humidity of 
71 per cent and offered a blood meal daily, as also glucose and water. In two series of 
observations dealing respectively with ninety-two and thirty females 50 per cent survived 
in both series to the sixtieth day and a female in the first series survived over 100 days. 
Curves given by plotting the logarithm of the percentage of survival against time in days 
were convex to the origin with increasing declination. The Gompertz function was derived 
from the curves by fitting tangents to points on these and measuring their slope. This gave 
the rate of mortality at the points of contact by using the equation: 
lu _ 2.303 (log,, No - log,, N) - 
1 , 
549 
VIABILITY 
where p is the mortality, N, and Nt the numbers at times 0 and t respectively and t the 
time. If the survival curve is a straight line with an unchanging rate of mortality, the 
Gompertz function is a horizontal straight line; if the survival curve is convex to the origin 
with the rate of mortality increasing with age (and provided the rate increases regularly 
with age), then the function is a straight line at an inclination. Curves for Anupheles 
hyrcanus, A. gambiae and A. funestus are also given, based on data available from the 
literature. 
The long periods given above show how very considerable the length of life of A&les 
aegypti under carefully controlled conditions may be. They are, however, much beyond 
ordinary laboratory experience. They show well, however, that if it is desired merely to keep 
insects alive the simplest method is to provide some form of sugary food, thus avoiding the 
rather heavy mortality that is apt to occur at oviposition. This is usually done by providing 
raisins or glucose in water. But a very clean and satisfactory method in practice is to 
maintain a supply of pieces of apple on which both sexes feed greedily. For reasons given 
elsewhere, however, it is usually undesirable, except for some special purpose, in critical 
experiments or testing to use insects thus kept alive and standardised conditions are much 
more precisely attained by employnig recently reared insects of known age from emergence 
(which should always be given) and fed only on water (Christophers, 1947). 
The length of life of A. aegypti in nature has been little investigated. This is given by 
Korovitskii and Artemenko (1933) at Odessa out of doors for females as on the average 
15 days (maximum 42 days), in basements 18 days (maximum 62 days) and in warm rooms 
as 10 and 24 days respectively for the mean and maximum. Here, however, the species is 
at or near the limit of distribution as largely determined by temperature. A point that is 
borne out by experience in the laboratory is that longevity tends to be greater at some 
suitable lower temperature than at that which is optimum for activity of the species. 
(b) EFFECT OF LOW TEMPERATURE 
Because of its medical importance many observers have investigated the effect of low 
temperatures upon adult A. aegypti. Temperatures below 0” C. appear to be fatal to the 
species if continued even for a short time. Flu (1920) found temperatures below freezing 
certain to kill the adult in 24 hours. At such temperatures the insect is completely im- 
mobilised and it is only a question after exposure whether recovery takes place at a warmer 
temperature. At 4” C. insects exposed for 1 hour survived; longer exposures killed 
(Otto and Neumann, 1905). At 7-9” C., however, these authors kept A. aegypti alive for 
82 days. After 30 days half the females were still alive. 
The point at which A. aegypti is rendered quite inert and incapable of movement is 
about 10” C. At various temperatures between this and 15” C. they are in greater or less 
degree torpid. Howard (1923) says that between 54” and 57” F. (13-14” C.) they are 
torpid, fly with difficulty and are no longer firm on their legs. Lewis (1933) notes that at 
10” C. the mosquitoes become dormant after a few days. Touch will only stimulate them 
to move if warmed. At higher temperatures they can always be induced to fly until within 
a few hours of death. 
A good deal of the immediate effect depends upon the suddenness with which the 
temperature reduction takes place. Mosquitoes taken out of the incubator at 28” C. into 
550 
EFFECT OF LOW TEMPERATURE 
a cold room cease flying at once and cling to the sides and roof of the cage, or if the 
temperature is under 15” C. they fall completely inert to the bottom of the cage. At 
13” C. the present author has found that A. aegJjpti maintained for days round about this 
temperature still maintain their normal resting position and if seriously disturbed move 
their legs slowly in an attempt to walk. If detached from their position they fall. At 
14” C. if detached they flew but quickly resettled. At 14.5” C. they flew on minimal 
disturbance or even voluntarily and without being disturbed they often walked slowly and 
awkwardly and raised themselves high on their legs as if stretching their limbs. At 15” C. 
behaviour in respect to flight and attitude was more or less normal. 
The point at which females cease to feed or oviposit has been given by Gutzevich (1931) 
as 16” C. Howard says that below 62” F. (17” C.) A. aegypti is sluggish and will not feed. 
Marchoux, Salimbeni and Simond (1903) state that between 19” and 25” C. they are slow to 
bite and below 15” C. they do not bite. Reed and Carroll (quoted by Howard, Dyar and 
Knab) state that A. aegypti will bite at 62” F. (17” C.) and above, but that they never 
succeeded in getting it to bite below this temperature. 
Pairing, according to Gutzevich, does not occur below 18-19” C. The same author 
notes that above 25” C. males are active and females rarely escape fertilisation. At 20- 
25” C. fertilisation is still the rule. Below this temperature the proportion fertilised sinks 
rapidly. 
The effect of low temperature is well summed up by Howard, Dyar and Knab (19 12), who 
state that adult A. aegypti exhibit greatest activity around 82” F. (28’ C.). Below 62” F. 
(17” C.) they are sluggish. From 54-57” F. (12-14” C.) they become torpid, fly with diffi- 
culty and are no longer firm on their legs. At 0” C. they die quickly. Below 62” F. (17” C.) 
they will not feed and below 68” F. (20” C.) they are seldom fertilised. 
Davis (1932), testing the ability of the species to maintain itself at low temperatures, 
found that colonies successfully maintained themselves at 18-19” C., but not below this 
temperature. 
(c) EFFECT OF HIGH TEMPERATURE AND THE 
THERMAL DEATH POINT 
The optimum temperature for the species is generally taken to be 28” C. Any increase 
above this appears to be increasingly unfavourable, and over 40” C. it is quickly fatal. 
Mellanby (1932), speaking of insects generally, states that at over 40” insects die from the 
effects of heat, below 36” C. all insects survived short exposures. These limits apply well to 
A. aegypti. Finlay (1886) gives the following effects of high temperature on the species. 
95-100” F. (35-38” C.) Uncomfortable 
102-105” F. (39-40” C.) Remains motionless in apparent death 
105-110” F. (41-43” C.) Apparent or actual death 
Macfie (1920) found that adults at 37” C. were not affected as regards activity, but life 
was shortened. There was reduced blood-sucking urge and fertility. After 5 minutes at 
39” C. they were fairly active, at 40” C. profoundly affected and at 41” C. or higher all 
insects were almost instantaneously rendered inert. There ware no eventual recoveries after 
44” C. Davis (1932) says that temperatures above 36” C. greatly shorten the life of adults. 
H. A. Johnson (1935) gives somewhat higher figures. He found A. aegypti relative to 
551 
VIABILITY 
other species of mosquito rather resistant. 106” F. (41” C.) did not cause rapid shortening 
of life and the species could survive 30 minutes at 113” F. (45” C.) and 10 minutes at 
117” F. (47” C.). 
In determining the thermal death point the present author has used the apparatus as 
shown in Fig. 22 (2). This consisted of a cylindrical lamp glass of thin glass about 4.5 cm. 
internal diameter and 15 cm. in length, closed below with a rubber bung and above with 
a bung bored to take a short length of tubing a little over a centimetre in internal diameter, 
a long piece of stout tubing and a thermometer. The long tube, closed below by netting, 
was intended as an outlet and also as a convenient handle to enable the whole to be set in 
a stand and sunk in a water-jacket with controlled temperature. The short tube was for 
introduction of the mosquitoes. This was fitted with a smaller-sized tube plugged at the 
lower end with wool to drop in and so, when mosquitoes had been introduced, prevent 
any entering the tube during the experiment. 
Mosquitoes, roughly to the required number, were drawn by suction into the receiver 
of the collecting pipette shown in the figure. The collecting tube of the pipette was then 
exchanged for a suitably bent tube. When transferring the mosquitoes they were first 
gently blown into the upper end of the tube, temporarily closed with netting, and then 
blown gently into the lamp glass through the short tube. In most of the exposures the 
inner surface of the lamp glass was covered with damp filter paper so that humidity was at 
about saturation. Some observations were, however, made with the apparatus in a dry 
condition, the effect as shown in the table being rather less lethal. The results are given in 
Table 47. As will be seen, the lethal effect varied with time of exposure. Full lethal effect 
(100 per cent deaths as shown by no recoveries overnight) for an exposure of 3 minutes 
required a temperature of 46-47” C. With 30 minutes’ exposure 43” C. sufficed. Lethal 
effect began to be shown at 41” C. which temperature gave about 50 per cent deaths with 
females after one hour’s exposure. The effect at 40” C. with the exposures used was slight. 
Knock down (heat stupor) with females began at 45” C. with 3 minutes’ exposure and 
was complete at 46-47” C., the insects being either motionless or showing only some slight 
movements of the legs. Usually after short exposures some or even a large proportion 
would later, at least partially, recover. Males appeared more susceptible to knock out 
than females. For dry heat the effects were very similar, though possibly slightly less for 
short exposures. 
The thermal death point, basing this upon one hour’s exposure might be placed at 
41-42” C. For rapid lethal effect in 15 minutes with no recoveries it was 44” C. 
The temperature limit at which the species was able to maintain itself in a colony has 
been studied by Davis (1932). At 36” C. colonies ceased to maintain themselves. 
(d) EFFECT OF HUMIDITY 
A high relative humidity not only favours duration of life, but also the general activity of 
the insects. This is especially so when high humidity is combined with temperature ap- 
proaching 28 “C. Thus in cages of insects kept at temperatures of 25” C. or over and relative 
humidity 90 per cent the increased activity is very marked and made evident by the loud 
hum and the increased settling rate when food is offered. A very high humidity has been 
found unfavourable by some authors. At the temperatures mentioned, however, it has not 
552 
EFFECT OF HIGH TEMPERATURE 
Table 47. Eflect of high temperature on the imago 
Time 
exposed Knock down* 
r A \ 
Temperature in No. of 
(0 C.) 
Sat. humidity 
47 
46 
45 
44 
43 
42 
40 
45 
44 
43 
42 
41 
40 
43 
42 
41 
41 
40 
39 minutes mosquitoes 
3 10 
3 9 
3 7 
3 5 
3 12 
3 9 
3 10 
15 9 
15 13 
15 10 
15 10 
15 9 
15 13 
30 10 
30 5 
30 11 
60 17 
60 12 
60 12 
Low humidity (dry container) 
47 3 13 
43 15 12 
42 15 10 
Sat. humidity 
47 
46 
45 
44 
43 
42 
40 
45 
44 
43 
42 
41 
40 
43 
42 
41 
41 
40 
39 3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
30 
30 
30 
60 
60 
60 13 
10 
8 
3 
8 
8 
6 
7 
8 
17 
14 
17 
12 
7 
3 
: 
17 
10 
Low humidity (dry container) 
47 3 10 
43 15 14 
42 15 8 Partial Complete Still 
active AtIected Killed 
Females 
- 
2 
2 
- 
4 
9 
10 
- 
- 
2 
m 
m 
13 
- 
1 
11 
5 
12 
11 10 - 
7 - 
5 - 
5 1 
8 6 
- 9 
- 10 
9 ’ - 
13 - 
8 - 
- 3 
- - 
- 13 
10 - 
4 - 
- - 
12 - 
- 5 
1 10 - 
5 
7 
4 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
2 
m 
- 
3 
- 
10 
10 
7 
2 
- 
- 
m 13 
12 
- - 
- 
10 - 
4 
- 
Males 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6 
6 
- 
- 
2 
m 
m 
12 
- 
- 
2 
- 
15 
9 13 
10 
8 
3 
8 
2 
- 
7 
8 
15 
- 
- 
- 
7 
3 
3 
4 
2 
1 - - 
- 9 
- 2 
- 1 
- 1 
8 - 
6 - 
- - 
- - 
- 2 
1 2 
- m 
12 - 
- 1 
- 2 
- 4 
- - 
- 13 
- 7 
- 10 - - 
- 14 - - 
6 2 8 - Final result 
c L \ 
10 
4 
- 
- 
2 
- 
- 
9 
13 
9 
5 
- 
- 
7 
5 
1 
7 
- 
- 
13 
8 
- 
13 
1 
6 
2 
7 
- 
- 
7 
8 
15 
11 
- 
- 
6 
1 
1 
4 
4 
2 
10 
14 
- Minimal 
lethal 
temperature 
- 
- 
45 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
43 
- 
- 
- 
- 
42 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
43 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
43 
- 
- 
- 
- 
43 
- 
- 
- 
- 
42 
- 
41 
- 
- 
- 
43 
- 
* m = Majority. 
553 
VIABILITY 
been found prejudicial to life and is especially favourable to emergence. Lewis (1933) 
notes that at 23” C. the mean life of the unfed adult at 0 per cent relative humidity is 
15 days and at 100 per cent relative humidity 7 days, and the data given for other per- 
centages by this author shows a steady increase in length of life as relative humidity is raised 
towards 100 per cent. 
A high humidity appears to be in general very favourable to the biting of mosquitoes in 
nature. Rudolfs (1925) found a steady increase in the numbers settling in outdoor tests 
from relative humidities below 60 per cent to a relative humidity of 96 per cent. 
Accurate determination of the humidity in the open or in a room is best carried out using 
the sling psychrometer. Where this is not possible, as in a cage, the wet and dry bulb is 
used. For methods of using these and full tables for the purpose, see Psychromatic Tables 
by Marvin (1941), published for the U.S. Department of Commerce Weather Bureau and 
obtainable from C. F. Casella and Co. Ltd., Regent House, Fitzroy Square, London, W. 1. 
For papers dealing with humidity in relation to insects and methods of producing fixed 
humidities under experimental conditions see Buxton (1931, 1932); Buxton and Mellanby 
(1934); Bertram and Gordon (1939). 
(e) INSECTICIDES 
Unlike the pupa and larva the imago is rapidly killed when brought into contact with such 
fluids as fixatives, being killed almost instantaneously if submerged in alcohol. The adult 
is also very susceptible to the effects of volatile substances and gases. A peculiar effect seen 
on exposure of some adult mosquitoes to certain vapours, notably those of some of the 
essential oils, described by Rudolfs (1922) is the casting off of limb segments (autotomy). 
This author also notes a peculiar shrill hum given by mosquitoes when exposed to irritant 
vapours, etc. Further the adult is very susceptible to various insecticides, including not only 
gases and vapours but also such as act on contact with the cuticle. It is this last form of 
agent that is chiefly used in operations against the adult insect.* 
Insecticides may be classed as: 
(1) Those of vegetable origin and especially in the present case pyrethrum and the pyrethrins. 
(2) Miscellaneous poisonous substances that may be lethal to various kinds of insects, such as 
arsenicals, fluorine compounds, mercury salts and such substances as creosote, carbolic acid, etc. 
(3) Certain chlorinated synthetic compounds including DDT, gammexane and other contact 
insecticides of a like nature. 
Under the first heading are a number of effective insecticides widely used in agriculture, 
such as nicotine, anabasin, rotenone and derris. But the only one now used to any extent 
against the adult mosquito is pyrethrum. In the form of the powdered flowers this has 
long had a reputation as ‘ insect powder ‘. It is now commonly used as the extract or in the 
form of, or in terms of, its active principles, pyrethrins I and II. These are respectively the 
mono- and diesters of a carboxylic acid (chrysanthemic acid) with a base (pyrethralone). 
For an account of its history, cultivation and other facts about pyrethrum see Gnadinger 
(1933); also on this and other insecticides of vegetable origin the booklet issued by the 
* For good general accounts of insecticides and their use see Brown (1951), Busvine (1951, 1952), King (1950, 
195 l), Buxton (1945, 1952), and for accounts of their use against mosquitoes: Bates (1949); Muirhead-Thomson 
(1951). Much of the older literature has been made largely obsolete by the discovery and use of recent types of 
insecticides. References to a number of the more important are, however, given in the text later. 
554 
INSECTICIDES 
Imperial Institute (1940). For recent views on the chemical nature of the pyrethrins see 
Busvine (1951, 1952). 
The pyrethrins are also used as an adjuvant in sprays both for knock-down effect and as 
an excitant to cause insects to take to flight and so increase the dose of insecticide received 
(see under aerosols). Formerly pyrethrum was one of the commonest substances burnt for 
fumigation to act as a repellent to mosquitoes in the house. 
Of the second class of substances that have been used against adult mosquitoes mention 
may be made of an effective proprietary synthetic insecticide much used in sprays in 
America, namely lethane (lethane 384 and lethane 60, see Plumb, 1944), also of another 
proprietary substance, thanite (see editorial, Science, 95, no. 2473, Suppl. ; p. 10) which is 
strongly lethal. Another well-known proprietary spray insecticide is ‘ Flit ‘, much used in 
households against domestic flies. Kerosene, though not itself markedly insecticidal, is 
much used as a basis for insecticidal sprays, a role for which it is specially fitted by reason 
of its great spreading qualities. Formerly sulphur, creosote, carbolic were burnt or vola- 
tilised as fumigants. 
Insecticides of the third class are remarkable especially in three respects, namely (1) they 
are intensely lethal on contact to insects, (2) being solids and but very slightly vaporisable 
they remain unchanged for long periods during which they retain their lethal character, 
and (3) they are relatively non-poisonous to man and mammals. 
The first to be recognised as possessing these qualities and to be employed as a mosquito 
insecticide was DDT. Its history has been frequently told (see West and Campbell, 1946). 
Like most other modern contact insecticides it is a chlorinated synthetic compound (2,2- 
bis(p-chlorphenyl) 1, 1, I-trichlorethane). Its discovery as a substance with remarkable 
properties was followed by that of another chlorinated synthetic compound, gammexane 
(BHC, or more correctly gamma BHC, this being the only one of five isomers having such 
properties). Its chemical name is gamma hexachlorcyclohexane. 
Gammexane is some ten times more powerful in its effect than DDT, but slightly more 
fumigant. Both are to some extent repellent, that is, cause mosquitoes to leave after a short 
contact, gammexane more so than DDT. But whereas after such contact with DDT 
mosquitoes often escape a fatal dose, with gammexane, owing to its higher toxicity, the 
dose received is usually fatal (Hadaway and Barlow, 1952). Gamma BHC may also, owing L 
to its fumigant effect, act lethally when it has been absorbed into a mud or clay surface. 
Other powerful insecticides of this type are: chlordane, dieldrin, aldrin, DDD, methoxy- 
chlor, all chlorinated hydrocarbons ; toxaphene, a chlorinated camphene ; parathion, an 
organo-phosphorus compound ; allethrin, a synthetic pyrethrin; and others. The following 
is a list of the new insecticides discovered later than DDT and BHC with a brief summary 
of their chief characteristics taken from Busvine (1952).* 
Chlordane. A dark brown viscous liquid soluble in oils. Effectiveness against Ai;des aegypti 
compared with DDT as one, O-66. Oral lethal dose to rats, 200-500 mg./kg. Persistence in 
residual film low. Chiefly used against the domestic fly. 
AZdrin. Wettable powder. Effectiveness against A. aegypti, 2.6. Lethal dose to rats, 45 mg./kg. 
Used also as larvicide. 
Dieldrin. Wettable powder. Effectiveness against A. aegypti, 4-O. Lethal dose to rats, 50- 
55 mg./kg. Used also as larvicide, considered a promising insecticide against flies and mosquitoes 
by Rajindar Pal (1952). 
* A review of the chemistry of insecticides with bibliography is given by Martin (1956) ; see also Brown (1951), 
Metcalf (1955 a). 
555 
VIABILITY 
DDD. Similar to DDT, but toxicity to mammals low: lethal dose to rats, 2500 mg./kg. Useful 
where toxicity is important, for example, cattle spraying. 
Methoxychlor. Toxicity still less: lethal dose to rats 6000 mg./kg. Used as larvicide as less toxic 
to fish. 
Parathion. Strongly toxic to mammals: lethal dose to rats, 3.5-10 mg./kg. Used against bed- 
bug. Also as larvicide and against adult. 
Toxaphene. Waxy solid. Low insecticidal properties, but prolonged persistence in film. 
Allethrin. Similar to natural pyrethrins in action. Knock-down effect less rapid, lethality 
about the same. Effectiveness against A. aegypti, 4-O. Also used as larvicide. 
WAYS IN WHICH INSECTICIDES ARE USED 
Insecticides directed against the adult mosquito may be used as : (1) fumigants ; (2) sprays ; 
(3) mists or aerosols; (4) residual films. There are also to be considered substances that, 
without necessarily being fatal, protect against the bites of mosquitoes, namely (5) repellents. 
At one timefumigalzts were the usual, if not almost the only, type of insecticidal action 
taken against mosquitoes. They include : smoke; the burning or volatilisation of such 
substances as sulphur, creosote, etc. and especially the burning of pyrethrum, usually in 
the form of cones of pyrethrum powder made up with nitre. Most of such measures are 
more correctly described as culicifuges. Though not very powerful under ordinary circum- 
stances they have a certain usefulness as a household remedy. For further particulars see 
Howard (191 I), Howard and Bishopp (1928), also Cove11 (1941), who gives much informa- 
tion with recipes regarding all forms of anti-mosquito measures. 
The term fumigant has, however, been used recently to indicate the effect where insecti- 
cides act at a distance, presumably by means of their vapour. Also the term ‘smokes’ has 
been applied to certain fumigants driven off by heat in the form of solid particles (see 
Busvine and Kennedy, 1949). 
Most usually insecticides against the adult mosquito have been used as sprays, either as 
a direct means of attacking the insects, or for the purpose of laying down residual films. 
For the first purpose a very commonly used medium has been kerosene in which the active 
insecticide is dissolved. Where danger of fire exists, or for other purposes, other substances 
may be used as the medium, for example, carbon tetrachloride. For automatic propulsion 
the substance ‘ Freon’ is used as, or added to, the medium, or compressed gas is used, giving 
the ‘ insecticidal bomb ‘. For small automatic sprays ‘ sparklets’ (solid CO,) such as may 
be used for making soda-water have been utilised. 
The insecticide formerly mostly used was pyrethrum in the form of the extract dissolved 
in kerosene (see Ginsburg, 1935; Symes, 1935; Hicks and Diwan Chand, 1936). Another 
important insecticide used in this way is lethane, as also DDT or other new insecticide. Or 
for reasons given later a small amount of pyrethrum extract may be added to the medium. 
The following are given by Busvine (1951) as representative sprays: 
0.1 per cent pyrethrins, or 
5.0 per cent lethane 384, or 
lo*0 per cent lethane (special), or 
5.0 per cent thanite, or 
0.35 per cent gamma BHC, 
or 
0.05 pyrethrins with 0.3 DDT, or 
0.03 pyrethrins with 0.5 DDT. 
556 
INSECTICIDES 
A modification of the spray is the recently developed mist or aerosol, the droplets of 
the sprayed fluid being made sufficiently small to remain floating for some time in the air. 
Examples of such given by Busvine are : 
3-O per cent DDT. 
5.0 per cent lubricating oil. 
O-3 per cent pyrethrins. 
dissolved in Frenon, 
3-O perTent DDT. 
15-20 per cent DDT solvent. 
0.4 per cent pyrethrins. 
l-2 per cent non-volatile oil. 
75-80 per cent Freon. 
For an account of the principles involved in the use of sprays and aerosols see especially 
David (1946a, b), David and Bracey (1946), Goodhue (1942, 1946), May (1945), Brown 
(1951), Kruse et al. (1951), Mackerras et al. (1950). 
The degree of atomisation depends upon the nozzle design, the propulsive force, the 
relative amount of air and fluid passing the nozzle and the viscosity and other physical 
properties of the fluid. For optimal effect of an aerosol the droplets should be of such a size 
that they will remain for a time suspended. They should not be so small that they rebound 
or fail to contact the insect. Velocity of the droplets and their uniform distribution is 
important. Owing to the movement of the wings, etc., a mosquito during flight receives 
a larger dose than when stationary. Since pyrethrum has an exciting action on mosquitoes 
causing them to take to flight, this substance may be used to increase the effectiveness of 
other insecticides employed. Pyrethrum may also be added to give rapid knock-down 
effect, its action in this respect being much more rapid than that of most other insecticides. 
One of the most extensively used anti-malarial measures is the employment of residual 
films of DDT, gammexane or other insecticide of this type. A large literature relates to the 
use and testing of such films, their physical characters, especially the nature of the deposit, 
whether crystalline, size of granule, etc., their effectiveness on various backgrounds and 
other points relating to their use (see especially the article by Hadaway and Barlow (1952), 
and the references given by these authors ; also Gahan et al. (1948), who give data on 
A. aegypti; Field (1950); Cutkomp (1947) ; Fay et al. (1947); Peffley et al. 1949); Reid 
(1951)). Besides films laid down by spraying, the new insecticides can also be used as 
insecticidal paints (Gilmour, 1946). See also ch. IV under ‘ Control and protection’, p. 84. 
MODE OF ACTION OF INSECTICIDES 
Entry of contact insecticides through the cuticle has been especially studied by Hurst (1940) 
and by Wigglesworth (1942, 1948), the latter with special reference to the structure of insect 
cuticle. According to Wigglesworth oils passing through the lipoid layer of the cuticle 
come into contact with water. Water is then liberated in the form of droplets which appear 
on the surface of the cuticle (see chapter on physiology under ‘The integument’, p. 698). 
Light oils pass in more readily than heavy and entry is very slow with vegetable oils. Addition 
of 5 per cent oleic acid to refined petroleum greatly increases its rate of entry. 
Hurst (1940) states that feebly dissociating compounds of high dielectric constant 
557 
VIABILITY 
penetrate the cuticle more readily in presence of relatively apolar substances of low di- 
electric constant. The toxicity of unsaturated compounds, such as are many insecticides, 
may for this reason be increased by the addition of non-toxic paraffins and cycloparaffins. 
Thus alcohol and kerosene separately have only a very slow effect on the larva of Cal& 
phora. But together they are rapidly fatal. 
Poisoning of the adult mosquito by DDT is chiefly displayed on the nervous system. 
Mosquitoes that have received a dose when resting on a surface impregnated with DDT 
soon become restless and fly off. Later they show increasing incoordinate movements of 
the legs with eventual stupor. In poisoning by pyrethrins the insects appear to be brought 
into a spastic condition, the legs, especially the fore-legs, being held in a characteristic rigid 
fashion and when attempting to recover their position when overcome they use movements 
that strongly suggest a man suffering from spastic paralysis. 
A review of the mode of action of insecticides with four pages of bibliography is given 
by Kearns (1956); see also Metcalf (1955a). 
ACQUIRED RESISTANCE TO INSECTICIDES 
Mention has already been made when dealing with control measures (ch. IV (b)) of acquired 
resistance against insecticides with a brief account of this condition. It remains to give 
very briefly what is known of such resistance. 
Acquired resistance to insecticides is not confined to mosquitoes or only recently known, 
but has been encountered as far back as 19 14 in the control of aphides and was known in 
some other insects (Harrison, 1952). Nor is it confined to compounds of the hydro- 
chlorinated type, though it is in respect to such that it has become recently more fully 
recognised and important from the widespread control operations now undertaken against 
flies and mosquitoes. As previously noted it was first reported in mosquitoes from Italy 
for a resistant strain of Culex and more recently for such a condition in Ai;des aegypti. 
It has also more recently been recorded as present in some degree for several species of 
Anopheks. The degree of resistance developed varies under different conditions but may 
amount to complete innocuousness to spraying with DDT and other chlorinated com- 
pounds. Brown (1956) notes that dieldrin-resistant flies may be 800 times more resistant 
than the susceptible species. 
Such resistance is now regarded, not as the result of acquirement of resistance by the 
individual, but due to the development of a resistant population through elimination of 
susceptible individuals and the hereditary passage of the character of resistance by those 
remaining, the regular killing off of susceptible strains resulting in time in a population of 
resistant strains. This original proportion of resistant individuals may be small but is 
commonly present. Thus Brown (1956) notes that 5 per cent of flies in the Gambia are 
naturally resistant and can by careful dosage be made the basis of a resistant strain. It is 
not certain, however, that all populations contain such a resistant component. Acquired 
resistance with such an origin becomes therefore very largely a genetical problem and its 
study from this point of view is now being actively carried on in a number of laboratories. 
Three chances of development of resistance are hypothecated by Busvine (1957), 
namely 
(a) The frequency and importance of genes conferring resistance in the original 
population; 
558 
8 
INSECTICIDES 
(b) the intensity of selection (that is the size of the population exposed to the insecticide 
and the proportion killed); 
(c) The number of generations per year. 
The method by which resistance is produced in the case of DDT is thought to be through 
possession by the resistant insect of an enzyme (dehydrochlorinase) which converts DDT 
into a harmless compound DDE ((2,2-bis-(p-chlorophenyl)-1 ,dichlorethylene), the process 
being known as dehydrochlorination. The enzyme is present in all tissues of the fly and 
especially the integument. DDT does not induce mutation, but those with resistance 
become the form of the insect left by elimination of non-resistant forms (Brown and 
Perry, 1956).* 
(f) REPELLENTS 
Repellents are substances that can be smeared on the skin without being irritant or poisonous 
and which prevent mosquitoes biting. They are usually oily fluids and may be used ‘neat ‘, 
or in some form of cream. They are also used to impregnate clothing to afford protection 
from bites and also wide-mesh netting used as a protection to the face and hands. They 
include a very large number of substances of varied chemical nature and different degrees 
of effectiveness depending upon their essential repellent properties, the time for which they 
remain effective when applied and whether they act at a distance or only on contact by 
the mosquito. 
Substances especially effective are (1) certain natural essential oils, notably oil of citro- 
nella, or their essential principles, or synthetic substances of this type (for example the 
very powerfully repellent substance hydroxycitronellal); (2) a number of the dihydric 
alcohols (diols) among which is Rutger’s 612 (ethylhexane diol-1 : 3) ; and (3) certain esters, 
for example dimethyl phthlate or other less well known esters of this type, such as isopropyl 
cinnamate or diethyl cinnamate or many others. 
An important character largely determining their suitability for use is the boiling point. 
Organic compounds with boiling points below 200” C. are of little practical use as they 
evaporate from the human skin too rapidly. Substances with boiling point much above 
300” C., whilst they give lasting effect usually lose in effective repellency. A high boiling 
point may, however, be useful for a special purpose, for example dibutyl phthalate 
(b.p. 325” C.) has been used for impregnating clothing since it stands up to washing. 
Probably the two most generally useful repellents are dimethyl phthalate for military 
or similar purposes where a strong and lasting effect is essential and a good oil of citronella 
for civilian use where a milder and less permanent effect may serve all that is required. 
The former can be used ‘neat ’ and applied after anointing the palms over all exposed skin 
(avoiding the near neighbourhood of the eyes or mucus membrane) or as a cream, a very 
satisfactory formula being the following: 
Dr Hamill’s cream (see Christophers, 1947) 
Dimethyl phthalate 12.5 C.C. 
White wax (cera alba) 9 g. 
Arachis oil 27.5 C.C. 
* For further information see reviews by Metcalf (1955 b), Hoskins and Gordon (1956), and papers by Busvine 
(1957) and later. See also Brown (1956), Hadaway and Barlow (1956). On genetics of insect resistance see 
Crow (1956). For instances of resistance developed during operations against yellow fever see Jenkins and West 
(1954), Sever0 (1956). 
559 
VIABILITY 
Melt the wax in the arachis oil on a water bath and stir in the dimethyl phthalate. It can 
be modified by slightly changing the proportions of wax and arachis oil to suit a hotter or 
colder climate. It spreads very readily and is pleasant to use. 
Oil of citronella if of good quality (a good Java oil) has the advantage of acting very 
strongly at a distance so that smearing of all exposed skin is unnecessary and a little on the 
clothing, socks, etc., may be sufficient to afford all that is required for comfort where danger 
of infection is not present. 
Little is known as to the reason why particular substances have repellent properties or 
what determines the degree of effectiveness. For an account of repellents and their testing 
see Christophers (1947). See also references there given and some recent papers on mosquito 
repellents given here under references. 
REFERENCES 
(U-d) VIABILITY 
BACOT, A. W. (1916). See references in ch. VI, p. 155. 
BEEUWKES, H., KERR, J. A., WETHERBEE, A. A. and TAYLOR, A. W. (1933). Observations on the 
bionomics and comparative prevalence of the vectors of yellow fever, etc. Trans. R. Sot. 
Trop. Med. Hyg. 26, 425-47. 
BERTRAM, D. S. and GORDON, R. M. (1939). An insectarium with constant temperature and 
humidity control, etc. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 33, 279-88. 
BONNE-WEPSTER, J. and BRUG, S. L. (1932). See references in ch. II (a-b), p. 45. 
BRUES, A. M. and SACHER, G. A. (1952). In Nickson’s Symposium on Radiobiology. Chapman and 
Hall, London, p. 441. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1931). The measurement and control of atmospheric humidity in relation to 
entomological problems. Bull. Ent. Res. 22, 431-47. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1932). Terrestrial insects and the humidity of the environment. Biol. Rev. 7, 
275-320. 
BUXTON, P. A. and MELLANBY, K. (1934). The measurement and control of humidity. Bull. Ent. 
Res. 25, 161-5. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
CONNOR, M. E. (1924). Suggestions for developing a campaign to control yellow fever. Amer. 
J. Trop. Med. 4, 277-307. 
DAVIS, N. C. (1932). The effects of heat and cold upon Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti. Amer. J. Hyg. 
16, 177-9 1. 
FIELDING, J. W. (1919). Notes on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata Fabr. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 13, 259-96. 
FINLAY, C. (1886). Yellow fever, its transmission by means of the CuZex mosquito. Amer. J. 
Med. Sci. 92, 395-409. 
FLU, P. C. (1920). Onderzoek naar de levensduur van Stegomyia fasciata bij lage temperaturen. 
Meded. Burg. Geneesk. Ned.-Ind. 7, 99-105. 
GADDUM, J. H. (1945). Lognormal distributions. Nature, Lond., 156, 463-6. 
GOMPERTZ (1825). Quoted by Gaddum (1945). 
GUTZEVICH, A. V. (1931). See references in ch. XXIV, p. 545. Abstract in Rev. AppZ. Ent. 21, 2. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1923). The yellow fever mosquito. U.S. Dep. Agric. Fmr’s Bull. no. 
1354. 
HOWARD, L. O., DYAR, H. G. and KNAB, F. (19 12). See references in ch. I df), p. 19. 
JOHNSON, H. A. (1935). The effect of high temperatures on the length of life of certain species of 
mosquito. J. Tenn. Acad. Sci. 10, 225-7. 
560 
REFERENCES 
KERSHAW, W. E., CHALMERS, T. A. and LAVOIPIERRE, M. M. J. (1954). Studies on arthropod 
survival. I. The pattern of mosquito survival in laboratory conditions. Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 48, 442-50. 
KOROVITSKII, L. K. and ARTEMENKO, V. D. (1933). Zur Biologie des Agdes aegypti. (In Russian.) 
Mug. Leningrad, 2, 400-6. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 22, 78. 
LAARMAN, J. J. (1955). S=e references, ch. XXIV, p. 545 
LEWIS, D. J. (1933). Observations on AFdes aegypti L. (Diptera: Culicidae) under controlled 
atmospheric conditions. Bull. Ent. Res. 24, 363-72. 
MACDONALD, G. (1952a). The analysis of the sporozoite rate. Trop. Dis. Bull. 49, 569-86. 
MACDONALD, G. (1952b). The analysis of equilibrium in malaria. Trop. Dis. Bull. 49, 813-29. 
MACDONALD, G. (1957). The Epidemiology and Control of Malaria. Oxford Univ. Press, London. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1915). Observations on the bionomics of Stegomyia fasciata. Bull. Ent. Res. 6, 
205-29. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1920). Heat and Stegomyia fasciata: short exposures to raised temperatures. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 14, 73-82. 
MACGREGOR, M. E. (1915). Notes on the rearing of Stegomyia fasciata in London. J. Trop. Med. 
(Hyg.), 18, 193-6. 
MARCHOUX, E., SALIMBENI, A. and SIMOND, P. L. (1903). See references in ch. I (f). 
MARVIN, C. S. (1941). Psychrometric Tables. U.S. Dept. Commerc. Weather Bur. (s&e text). 
MELLANBY, K. (1932). The influence of atmospheric humidity on the thermal death point of a 
number of insects. J. Exp. BioZ. 9, 222-31. 
OTTO, M. and NEUMANN, R. 0. (1905). Studien iiber Gelbfieber in Brasilien. 2. Hyg. ZnfektKr. 
51, 357-506. 
PUTNAM, P. and SHANNON, R. A. (1934). The biology of Stegomyia under laboratory conditions. 
Proc. Ent. Sot., Wash., 36, 217-42. 
RUDOLFS, W. (1925). Relation between temperature, humidity and activity of house mosquitoes. 
J. N. Y. Ent. Sot. 33, 163-9. 
(e) INSECTICIDES 
BATES, M. (1949). The Natural History of Mosquitoes. Macmillan Co., New York. 
BROWN, A. W. A. (1951). Insect Control by Chemicals. Chapman and Hall, London, and Wiley 
and Sons, New York. 
BROWN, A. W. A. (1956). (Resistance to dieldrin.) World HZth Org. x, no. 3. 
BROWN, A. W. A. and PERRY, A. S. (1956). Dehydrochlorination of DDT by resistant houseflies 
and mosquitoes. Nature, Lond., 178, 368-9. 
BUSVINE, J. (1951). Insects and Hygiene. Methuen and Co., London. 
BUSVINE, J. (1952). The newer insecticides in relation to pests of medical importance. Trans. R. 
Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 46, 245-52. 
BUSVINE, J. (1957). Insecticide resistance. Strains of insects of public health importance. Trans. 
R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 51, 11-31. 
BUSVINE, J. and KENNEDY, J. S. (1949). Experiments with insecticidal smokes for indoor use. 
Ann. Appl. Biol. 36, 20-85. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1945). The use of the new insecticide DDT in relation to the problems of tropical 
medicine. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 38, 367-93. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1952). The place of insecticides in tropical medicine: an introduction. Trans. R. 
Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 46, 213-26. 
COVELL, G. (1941). Malaria Control by Antimosquito Measures. Thacker and Co., London. 
CROW, J. F. (1956). Genetics of insect resistance to chemicals. Ann. Rev. Ent. 2, 227-46. 
CUTKOMB, L. K. (1947). Residual sprays to control Anopheles quadrimaculatus. J. Econ. Ent. 40, 
328-33. 
DAVID, W. A. L. (1946a). Factors influencing the interaction of insecticidal mists and flying 
insects. I. The design of a spray testing chamber and some of its properties. Bull. Ent. Res. 
36, 373-93. 
DAVID, W. A. L. (1946b). Factors, etc. II. The production and behaviour of kerosene insecti- 
cidal spray mists and their relation to flying insects. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, l-28. 
36 561 CH 
VIABILITY 
DAVID, W. A. L. and BRACEY, P. (1946). Factors, etc. III. Biological factors. Bull. Ent. Res. 37, 
177-90. 
FAY, R. W., COLE, E. L. and BUCHNER, A. J. (1947). Comparative residual effectiveness of 
organic insecticides against houseflies and malaria mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 40, 635-40. 
FIELD, J. W. (1950). Fumigant and repellent effects of BHC (gammexane) and DDT upon Ano- 
pheles. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 43, 547-8. 
GAHAN, J. B., GILBERT, I. H., PIFFLEY, R. L. and WILSON, H. G. (1948). Comparative toxicity 
of four chlorinated organic compounds to mosquitoes, houseflies and cockroaches. J. Econ. 
Ent. 41, 795801. 
GILMOUR, D. (1946). The toxicity to houseflies of paints containing DDT. J. Coun. Sci. Indust. 
Res. 19, 225-32. 
GINSBURG, J. N. (1935). Protection from mosquito bites in outdoor gatherings. Science, 82, 
490-l. 
GNADINGER, C. B. (1933). Pyrethrum Flowers. McLaughlin, Gormley King and Co., Minneapolis. 
GOODHUE, L. D. (1942). Insecticidal aerosol production. Ind. Engng Chem. 34, 1456. 
GOODHUE, L. D. (1946). Aerosols and their application. J. Econ. Ent. 39, 506-9. 
HADAWAY, A. B. and BARLOW, F. (1952). Some physical factors affecting the efficiency of 
insecticides. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 46, 236-44. 
HADAWAY, A. B. and BARLOW, F. (1956). Effects of age, sex and feeding on the susceptibility 
of mosquitoes to insecticides. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 438-43. 
HARRISON, C. M. (1952). The resistance of insects to insecticides. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 
46, 255-60. 
HICKS, E. P. and DIWAN CHAND (1936). Transport and control of AL;des aegypti in aeroplanes. 
Rec. Malar. Surv. India, 6, 73-90. 
HOSKINS, W. M. and GORDON, H. T. (1956). Arthropod resistance to chemicals. Ann. Rev. Ent. 
1, 89-122. 
HOWARD, L. 0. (1911). Remedies and preventives against mosquitoes. U.S. Dep. Agric. Fmrs’ 
Bull. no. 444. 
HOWARD, L. 0. and BISHOPP, F. C. (1928). Mosquito remedies and preventives. U.S. Dept. Agric. 
Fmrs’ Bull. no. 1570. 
HURST, H. (1940). Permeability of insect cuticle. Nature, Lond., 145, 462-3. 
IMPERIAL INSTITUTE (1940). A survey of insecticide materials of vegetable origin. Imperial 
Institute. London. 
JENKINS, D. W. and WEST, A. S. (1954). Yellow fever in Trinidad : a brief review. Mosquito News. 
KEARNS, C. W. (1956). The mode of action of insecticides. Ann. Rev. Ent. 1, 123-48. 
KING, W. V. (1950). DDT-resistant houseflies and mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 43, 527-32. 
KING, W. V. (1951). Repellents and insecticides available for use against insects of medical 
importance. J. Econ. Ent. 44, 338-43. 
KRUSE, C. W., PHILEN, E. A. and LUDVIK, G. F. (1951). Characteristics of larvicidal sprays 
applied by aircraft for the control of Anopheles quadrimaculatus. J. Nat. Malar. Sot. 10, 
23-4. 
MACKERRAS, I. M., RATCLIFFE, F. N., GILMOUR, D. and MULES, M. W. (1950). The dispersal of 
DDT from aircraft for mosquito control. Bull. Commonw. Sci. Indust. Res. Org. Austral. 
no. 257. 
MARTIN, H. (1956). The chemistry of insecticides. Ann. Rev. Ent. 1, 149-66. 
MAY, K. R. (1945). The cascade impactor. An instrument for sampling coarse aerosols. J. Sci. 
Instr. 22, 187-95. 
METCALF, R. L. (1955a). Organic Insecticides. Their Chemistry and Mode of Action. Interscience 
Publishers Inc. New York. 
METCALF, R. L. (1955b). (Review of resistance.) Physiol. Rev. 35, 197-232. 
MUIRHEAD THOMSON, R. C. (1951). Mosquito Behaviour in Relation to Malaria Transmission and 
Control in the Tropics. Ed. 2. Edward Arnold, London. 
PEFFLEY, R. L. and GAHAN, J. B. (1949). Residual toxicity of DDT analogs and related chlorin- 
ated hydrocarbons to houseflies and mosquitoes. J. Econ. Ent. 42, 113-16. 
562 
REFERENCES 
PLUMB, G. H. (1944). Lethane 384 Special for control of the brown dog tick. J. Econ. Ent. 37, 
292-3. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1952). Dieldrin for malaria control. Indian J. Malarial. 6, 325-30. 
REID, J. A. (1951). A laboratory method for testing residual insecticides against Anopheline 
mosquitoes. Bull. Ent. Res. 41, 761-77. 
RUDOLFS, W. (1922). Chemotropism of mosquitoes. N.J. Agric. Exper. Sta. Bull. no. 367. 
SEVERO, 0. P. (1956). Acquired resistance to DDT in the Dominican Republic. Chron. World 
HZth Org. 10, 347-54. 
SYMES, C. B. (1935). Insects in aeroplanes. Rec. Malar. Res. Lab. Kenya, no. 6. 
WEST, L. S. and CAMPBELL, G. A. (1946). DDT the Synthetic Insecticide. Chapman and Hill, 
London. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). Some notes on the integument of insects in relation to the entry 
of contact insecticides. Bull. Ent. Res. 33, 205-18. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1948). Mode of action of new insecticides. Rep. 5th Commonw. Entom. 
Conf. 1948, 35-37. 
(f) REPELLENTS 
ALTMAN, R. M. and SETH, C. N. (1955). Investigation of repellents for protection against 
mosquitoes in Alaska. J. Econ. Ent. 48, 67-72. 
APPLETHWAITE, K. H. and CROSS, H. F. (1951). Further studies of repellents in Alaska. J. Econ. 
Ent. 44, 19-22. 
APPLETHWAITE, K. H. and SMITH, C. N. (!950). Field tests with mosquito and sandties in Alaska. 
J. Econ. Ent. 43, 353-7. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1945). Insect repellents. Brit. Med. Bull. 3, 222-4. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1947). Mosquito repellents. J. Hyg., Camb., 45, 176-231. 
DETHIER, V. G. (1947). Chemical insect attractants and repellents. Blakiston Co., Philadelphia, 
and Lewis and Co., London. 
DETHIER, V. G. (1956). Repellents. In Ann. Rev. Ent. 1, 181-202, 144 references. 
KING, W. V. (1951). Repellents and insecticides available for use against insects of medical 
importance. J. Econ. Ent. 44, 338-43. 
KNIPLING, E. F. and DOVE, W. E. (1944). Recent investigations of insecticides and repellents for 
the armed forces. J. Econ. Ent. 37, 477-80. 
563 36-2 
XXVI 
THE IMAGO: 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
(a) THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION (Figs. 63-6) 
Many authors have described with more or less completeness the alimentary system or parts 
of this in the imaginal mosquito. Among very early descriptions are those by Pouchet 
(1847), who describes in Culex eight vesicular stomachs ; Dufour (185 I), who in Theobaldia 
annulata first described the diverticula; Apostolidon (1901), who very early figured the 
alimentary tract in Anopheles. Works of more modern type are those of Grandpre and 
Charmoy (1900), Christophers (1901) ; Grassi (1901) ; Nuttall and Shipley (1903) ; Thompson 
(1905); Leon(1923,1924a,b); DeBoissezon(1930); Perfiliev(l930). Oftheseaccountsthose 
by Nuttall and Shipley and by Thompson are particularly complete and detailed, that by 
Thompson being especially valuable as giving much information on the transition from 
larval to imaginal parts. On the changes in metamorphosis are also : Hurst (1890a, b); 
Holt (19 17) ; Richins (1938). Some excellent figures giving the appearances of the ali- 
mentary canal as seen in dissections will be found in the Atlas by Neumann and Mayer 
(19 14), some of which have been reproduced by Martini (1920). 
On the intracranial portion of the canal are the very thorough studies by Sinton and 
Cove11 (1927) in Anopheles and by Barraud and Cove11 (1928) in other genera of Culicidae, 
also the contributions by Robinson (1939), and by Jobling (1928) (the latter dealing with 
Culicoides, where the parts in question have a close resemblance to those in the mosquito). 
Snodgrass (1943, 1944, 1953), in respect to the structures situated in the head, has dealt 
with their nature and given a terminology in accordance with the generalised insect plan. 
On the visceral portions of the tract see Jagujhinskaia (1940) and Rajindar Pal (1943), 
who describe the peritrophic membrane following a blood feed; Trembley (1951), who, 
besides other observations, describes the pyloric spines; Engel (1924), who describes the 
rectum and rectal papillae, including those of the male. On the salivary glands, first 
described in the mosquito by Macloskie (1887, 1888), and whose figure of the sucking 
apparatus of the mosquito is reprinted in an editorial (1898) in the British Medical Journal, 
are Christophers (1901); Grassi (1901); Nuttall and Shipley (1903); Goldi (1913); Leon 
(1923) ; Shute (1940) ; Jensen (1956) ; Jensen and Jones (1957) ; Bhatia, Wattal and Kalra 
(1957). A photograph of the glands of Agdes aegypti is given by Beyer, Pothier, Couret 
and Lemann (1902). A description of the salivary pump is given by Cornwall (1923). 
References to the Malpighian tubules will be found under the excretory system in ch. xxx; 
see also the section on digestion in ch. XXXI. 
Though some parts of the canal in the imago are still recognisable as those present in the 
larva, many profound changes have taken place to adapt structures to the two entirely 
different methods of feeding and two entirely different kinds of food to be dealt with. This 
564 
ALIMENTARY CANAL 
applies especially to those parts within the head, the homologies of which have been very 
variously interpreted by different authors. It is helpful here to appreciate the changes 
previously described which take place in passage from the larval to the imaginal head, 
namely the shrinking of the clypeofrontal portion, greatly ballooned in the larva to accom- 
modate the enormous pharynx with its fringes, to the crowded-up contracted condition as 
seen in the imago. 
In the imago the alimentary canal consists of: 
(1) A prestomial portion represented by the Zabral canal (Fig 64 (1) Lc) in the proboscis 
and other structures anterior to the true mouth. 
(2) A stomodaeal portion, which consists of two pump-like organs, the buccal cavity 
(Bc) and the oesophageal pump (p’) continued as a short muscular oesophagus from which 
arise three sac-like diverticula (Fig. 65 (l)), two small dorsal (Dd) and one much larger 
ventral (Dv). 
(3) The part of the canal derived from the mesenteron, ventriculus, or as it is usually 
termed in the mosquito, mid-gut (Fig. 65 (1) Mg). 
(4) A proctodaeal portion, the hind-gut, made up of a small proximal dilatation, pyloric 
ampulla (am) into which the Malpighian tubules open, a narrow intestine-like ileum (IL) 
sometimes called ileo-colon, and a terminal portion, rectum (Rc) that opens at the anus. 
At the junction of the oesophagus with the mid-gut is a thickened portion with a valve- 
like intussusception of the former into the latter corresponding to the much more developed 
structure in the larva commonly termed the proventriculus, but more accurately named the 
cardia (Ca). In the rectum are the rectal papillae (Fig. 66 (1) rp). 
Also connected with the alimentary canal are the salivary glands (Fig. 66 (6) sg) with 
their ducts, salivary ducts (sd), which combine beneath the sub-oesophageal ganglion to form 
the common salivary duct (csd) terminating in the salivarypump (sip). Opening into the canal, 
but described under the excretory system are the five Malpighian tubules (Fig. 65 (1) Mt). 
The general character and arrangement of these parts will be clear from the accom- 
panying figures. 
The capacious pharynx of the larva, the large well-developed proventriculus (cardia), the 
voluminous gastric caeca and the swollen colon so conspicuous in the larva are none of 
them present in the imago. Nor in the mid-gut is there the conspicuous feature of a peri- 
trophic membrane. If a peritrophic membrane exists, it is confined to the short period of 
digestion of a blood meal. On the other hand, the characteristic rectal papillae of the imago 
are lacking in the larval rectum. 
THE LABRAL CANAL (Fig.64(1-3)Lc) 
The first portion of the food canal lies in the proboscis, the parts composing which have 
already been described. It lies wholly in the labrum which is bent round ventrally to 
form a deep groove that for practical purposes is a closed canal. It may conveniently be 
named the Zabral canal. Its walls are formed entirely by the ventral plate of the labrum. 
This, as already noted when describing the parts of the proboscis, is a separate structure 1 
from the externally situated dorsal plate and has quite different connections basally from 
this. The dorsal plate is continued basally into the moveable front portion of the clypeus 
here provisionally termed the preclypeus (Fig. 63 (l-3) PC). The ventral plate is the 
sclerotised ventral aspect of the labrum and is continuous basally with the roof of the 
buccal cavity. It was formerly thought that the labrum formed only an open gutter and 
565 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
that to complete the canal this was closed in below by the hypopharynx (Fig. 64 (4) hp). 
The thin lateral edges of the ventral plate are, however, practically in contact through all 
except the most basal portion of the canal. Nevertheless, as observed by Thompson, who 
gives an excellent account of these structures, some support to these thin edges may still 
be necessary from the hard flat upper surface of the hypopharynx. What may be impor- 
tant also in this respect are two folds (Lr”‘), one on each side of the under surface of the 
labrum, each of which forms a flat surface resting on the flat upper surface of the hypo- 
pharynx. Towards the base of the proboscis these folds become increasingly sclerotised and 
eventually flatten out into thin plates which take over the function of closing-in the canal 
in its basal portion where the edges of the ventral plate separate (Fig. 64 (4) Lr”). As these 
lateral folds and their basal continuations are important parts of the canal, they may for 
convenience of description be termed the lateral plates (of the labrum). 
The basal connections of the parts of the proboscis, so far as these take part in the 
formation of the food channel, are shown in Fig. 63. The dorsal plate of the labrum is 
attached basally to the moveable portion of the clypeus (PC) and has no direct connection 
other than by membrane with the food channel (Fig. 63 (2) a). The ventral plate at the 
base of the labrum ends abruptly in membrane and is connected only by a thin median 
thickening with the sclerotised roof of the buccal cavity, its edges here diverging and 
ceasing to close in the food canal ventrally (Fig. 63 (5) c). At this level the lateral plates, 
after broadening out to close in the canal, abruptly thicken into rods and in doing so leave 
widely open the ventral aspect of the labral canal. It is here that the labral canal terminates 
Figure 63. Alimentary canal. 
Lateral view of buccal cavity and oesophageal pump. 
Anterior portion of same to show region of mouth. a, dorsal plate of labrum; b, ventral 
plate of same; c, lateral plate of same; d, hypopharynx with salivary channel; e, labium. 
Dorsal view of buccal cavity and oesophageal pump. 
Dorsal view of roof of buccal cavity. a, lateral plate of labrum; b, membranous area of roof; 
c, hummocky area lying behind posterior hard palate. 
Anterior hard palate and related structures (ventral view). a, lateral plates forming thin 
flanges at base of labrum; b, rod-shaped continuation of same; c, dorsal portion of ventral 
plate of labrum; d, thinned ventral edge of same. 
Sagittal section through mouth to show opening of labral canal into alimentary canal 
proper. a, dorsal plate of labrum continued into preclypeus; b, ventral plate with flange-like 
sides forming lateral wall of labral canal; c, flange of lateral plate of labrum; d, hypopharynx 
forming floor of true alimentary canal. 
The arrow indicates position where the labral canal enters the alimentary canal, that is the 
mouth. 
7 A, section through a sensory pit on the anterior hard palate; B, a sensory pit on membranous 
roof of buccal cavity. 
8 Transverse section of hypopharynx with salivary channel. a, position of lighter area in 
cuticle. 
9 Apex of hypopharynx showing subapical opening. 
10 Dorsal view of base of hypopharynx showing the salivary pump. 
11 Portions of common salivary duct. Only the cuticular intima is shown. a, oblique lines of 
thickening. 
For explanation of lettering see that for Fig. 64. 
566 
P’ 
I 0% mm. I IO II 
Figure 63 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
in the alimentary canal proper. It should perhaps be pointed out that the labral canal is 
essentially a groove in the under surface of the labrum and that its floor is formed by the 
curled-in edges of this groove and not by the true floor of the alimentary canal, which in 
this position would be the dorsal aspect of the hypopharynx. At the gap between the bars, 
however, the floor is the dorsal aspect of the hypopharynx and the channel becomes the 
alimentary canal (Fig. 63 (6)). 
The labral canal in most of its length is very nearly circular in section, though with the 
transverse diameter somewhat greater than the vertical, the diameters being respectively 
about 24,~ and 18-20,~. Towards the apex of the labrum, where the dorsal and ventral 
plates have fused to form a hard point, the channel becomes somewhat narrower and 
basally it widens considerably reaching up to 30,~ or more in transverse diameter (Fig. 64 (3)). 
The labral canal in the male is very similar to that in the female. * 
THE MOUTH (Figs. 63 (6); 64 (7)) 
Where the labral canal terminates proximally would appear to be the true morphological 
mouth. Not only is this the level at which for the first time the alimentary canal becomes 
closed laterally, but the arrangement of the surrounding parts, allowing for the elongation, 
* In a recent description (1957) of the mouth-parts M. L. Bhatia and B. L. Wattal (I& J. Malar. 11, 183-9) 
describe the presence of delicate septal rings projecting at intervals into the lumen of the labral canal (19-29 in 
the female; 26-33 in the male). 
6 
7 
8 Transverse section through region of the labella. 
The same through labial portion of the proboscis. 
The same through the extreme base of the proboscis. 
The same through the tip of the clypeus. 
Transverse section showing labral canal bounded below by the thin lateral plates of the 
labrum. a, labral canal; b, alimentary canal. 
Transverse section a little posterior to 5 to show the lateral plates continued as rods with wide 
opening between. a, termination of labral canal; b, alimentary canal. 
Transverse section at level of true mouth. c, anterior end of anterior hard palate; 
e, extensions of salivary pump and fold passing to region of mandibular socket (suspen- 
sorium). 
Transverse section through anterior portion of buccal cavity. d, posterior end of anterior 
hard palate. 
9 Transverse section through buccal cavity at level of membranous roof. 
10 The same at level of posterior hard palate. 
11 The same through posterior end of buccal cavity showing frontal ganglion. Figure 64. Alimentary canal. 
Lettering : ahp, anterior hard palate ; ap, apodeme ; Bc, buccal cavity; Bc’, floor of buccal 
cavity ; CL, clypeus; CL’, membranous area; CL”, line of clypeus; csd, common salivary duct ; 
.fg, frontal ganglion; G, gena; g. 1, supra-oesophageal ganglion; g. 2, sub-oesophageal ganglion; 
hp, hypopharynx; L, labium; L”, basal end of labium; Lc, labral canal ; Lr’, dorsal plate of 
labrum; Lr”, ventral plate of labrum; Lr”‘, lateral plate of labrum; Zb, labellum; Zj, lateral flange 
of buccal cavity; Zg, ligula; In, labial nerve; MO, mouth; md, mandible; mx, maxilla; mxa, 
maxillary apodeme ; mxp, maxillary palp; P’, oesophageal pump; P’v, oesophageal valve ; PC, 
preclypeus; php, posterior hard palate ; sd”, salivary channel; sip, salivary pump; sm, salivary 
muscle; so, sensory pit; t, trachea; vfl, ventral flange of buccal cavity. 
568 
6 
csd - Lr’ Lr’ 
I O-05 mm. , 3 
IO 
Figure 64 
569 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
has a great similarity to that already indicated as the mouth in the larva. There is the same 
transverse slit-like opening, dorsal to which lies the under surface of the base of the labrum 
and ventrally in the median line the base of the hypopharynx with what would have been 
the opening of the salivary duct in the larva were it not that changes have led to this being 
continued in the imago as a closed canal in the elongated hypopharynx. On each side of the 
slit-like mouth in their due positions the mandibles and maxillae take origin with the 
maxillary palps, no longer the tiny organs of the larva but relatively large structures. Very 
similar too to the condition in the larva is the fold passing from the hypopharynx to the 
now much reduced mandibles (Fig. 64 (7) e). 
THE SALIVARY PUMP AND SALIVARY CHANNEL 
(Figs. 63 (l), (2), (10); 64 (5)) 
The common salivary duct at the level of the base of the hypopharynx enters a heavily 
sclerotised structure, the salivary pump (sd’). From this a further length of duct passes 
down the median line of the hypopharynx to open at the termination of this organ. This 
latter portion of duct differs in character from that entering the pump in that it lacks the 
characteristic taenidial markings of the salivary and common salivary ducts. It is of late 
formation during the pupal stage and in some insects and possibly some mosquitoes may 
be wholly or partially an open gutter. To distinguish it from the true salivary ducts it may 
be termed the salivary channel (sd”). 
The salivary channel in the female Aedes aegypti is a thick-walled narrow duct extending 
from the salivary pump to the point of the hypopharynx where it opens subterminally, as 
described by Robinson in Anopheles, on the dorsal aspect. At its origin for a short distance 
it is somewhat dilated, narrowing gradually to a very uniform bore throughout. It lies 
immediately below the sclerotised upper surface of the hypopharynx, in contact and fused 
with this. A small, somewhat lighter, area may be seen in some sections in the cuticle lying 
over the duct, but so far as could be made out the duct is a closed canal throughout its 
length. Thompson speaks of the channel as the salivary gutter. But his figures show it as 
in AEdes aegypti. Robinson’s reference to a subterminal opening would also seem to 
suggest a closed canal in Anopheles. In female Culicoides Jobling (1928) describes the 
channel as a closed canal in the proximal third of the hypopharynx and an open groove 
for the remainder of the organ. 
The salivary pump is situated at the base of the hypopharynx. It is a strongly sclerotised 
cup-shaped structure firmly fixed in the sclerotised base of the hypopharyngeal dorsal wall. 
The open end of the cup is directed posteriorly and closed by a thick but seemingly soft 
membrane through the middle of which the common salivary duct enters the cup’s cavity. 
Into the membrane on each side is inserted the comparatively large salivary muscle of its 
side taking origin from the flange of the buccal cavity and lying beneath the floor of that 
cavity throughout much of its length. From the upper anterior aspect of the cup the 
salivary channel issues with on each side a thickened supporting spur (Fig. 63 (10)). 
In the male there is an almost identical pump. But there is no separate hypopharynx 
and the salivary channel runs as a slightly sclerotised channel along the soft membrane of 
the labial gutter terminating near the tip of the ligula. Thompson figures the channel as an 
open groove without any special thickening of its walls. In Culicoides Jobling’s figure 
appears to show it as a closed canal throughout. 
570 
ALIMENTARY CANAL 
THE BUCCAL CAVITY (Figs.63,64 Bc) 
The structure of the part here termed buccal cavity has been very fully described in 
Anopheles by Sinton and Cove11 (1927), whose nomenclature of its parts is here followed. 
The buccal cavity in a number of species and genera of Culicines, including that of A&des 
(Stegomyia) albopicta, has also been described and figured by Barraud and Cove11 (1928). 
The characters of the organ are of considerable systematic importance in Anopheles. But 
apart from such small differences as may distinguish some forms the general structure 
throughout the Culicini is very similar. The elaborate armature borne on the posterior 
border in many Anophelini is absent in the Culicini, including AFdes aegypti. 
This part of the intra-cranial alimentary canal has by many authors been termed 
pharynx (Jobling, 1928 (in Culicoides); Marshall, 1938; Martini, 1920). But though this 
term is clearly rightly applied to the large dilated pharynx of the larva, it is doubtful if it 
is a correct name for the part now under consideration in the imago. In the larva the chief 
bulk of the organ with its fringes lies posterior to the frontal ganglion. But in the imago 
only the most posterior portion is so situated (Fig. 63 (1)). According to Snodgrass (1935) 
the buccal cavity in insects is defined as the first part of the stomodaeum lying just within 
the mouth; its dilator muscles arising on the clypeus, and inserted before the frontal 
ganglion and its connectives. On this definition the greater part of the organ now being 
discussed would be buccal cavity. As will be seen later, muscles of the part are also in 
conformity with this view. On the other hand, Snodgrass (1943, 1944) homologises this 
organ in the mosquito as the cibarium (preoral cibarial pocket), a part of the canal situated 
anterior to the true mouth which he considers in the mosquito to have been carried forward 
by lateral extension forwards of the union of the clypeal borders with the edge of the 
ciberial surface of the hypopharynx. In respect to homology with the larval parts Thompson 
has very succinctly and clearly described the relation when he says : ‘The valve and posterior 
hard palate regions are derived from the “pharynx” of the larva. The remainder of the 
pharynx and the proximal parts of the proboscis canal are formed from the “ buccal cavity ” 
of this earlier stage. ’ It is clear that the parts in the mosquito imago have been very pro- 
foundly modified, making accurate homologies in relation to the organ as a whole difficult, 
and it has seemed most in accordance with the facts to retain the name buccal cavity as 
has been very largely done by systematists dealing with the Culicidae. 
In general shape the buccal cavity is tubular, flattened dorso-ventrally, and, though in 
part membranous, is in the main heavily sclerotised. It lies for most of its length ventral to, 
but at some distance from, the clypeus, extending from the mouth at the base of the 
proboscis to a short distance beyond the posterior border of the clypeus where it ends in 
two conspicuous diverging lateral processes, lateralflanges (Fig. 63 (3) Z$), and is linked be- 
tween these by membrane to the anterior ends of the plates forming the oesophageal pump. 
Its roof is largely membranous with thickenings anteriorly and posteriorly. The anterior 
thickening, anterior hard palate (Fig. 63 (4) ahp) is situated in the middle line entirely sur- 
rounded by membranous roof, except anteriorly where it is linked by a narrow isthmus 
to the ventral plate of the labrum (Lr”). The anterior hard palate is rather irregularly 
fusiform, shaped, as described by Nuttall and Shipley, somewhat like a trowel with the 
pointed tip directed backwards. It is heavily sclerotised and carries on each side two sen- 
sory pits with short spines. Lateral to it on each side on the membrane are six more pits 
arranged as shown in the figure (Fig. 63 (4), (5)). Posterior to the anterior hard palate, is 
57= 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
an extensive membranous area into which muscles are inserted and behind this, occupying 
about the posterior third of the organ, is a more indefinite thickening with its lateral margins 
forming indefinite bar-like thickenings, posterior hardpalate (php). This normally lies some- 
what sagged below the level of the lateral borders of the cavity. It terminates shortly 
before the end of the organ in membrane with small hummocky thickenings (Fig. 63 (4) c). 
The floor is uniformly thickened extending from the base of the hypopharynx with the 
salivary pump to a thickened bar forming its posterior border, which in Acdees aegypti 
carries on each side of the middle line two closely approximated small sensory pits (so). 
Laterally its thickened border, which is continued backwards from the thickened bars 
previously described at the base of the labrum, is continued into the lateral flanges and 
from across its ventral aspect towards its posterior end arises the flange-like projection, 
ventral flange (Fig. 63 (l), vJE), f rom which the salivary muscles take origin. 
For about their anterior third the thickened lateral borders are continuous with the 
broad apodematous sheets that extend downwards from the sides of the clypeus. These 
pass between the partially membranous genae and the median rostrum. Their posterior 
borders are concave and well defined. But anteriorly they merge into the membranous 
area separating the preclypeal portion of the rostrum from the clypeal as described in the 
section on the head capsule (Fig. 63 (2)). 
Numerous muscles take their insertion at different parts of the organ, notably along the 
length of the roof coming from the clypeus and on the lateral flanges coming from the 
maxillary apodemes. These will be described later when dealing with the muscles of the 
head. Lying beneath the floor of the cavity are the salivary muscles. Above the roof near 
the posterior border is the frontal ganglion. 
The buccal cavity in the male does not differ materially from that in the female. 
THE OESOPHAGEAL PUMP (Fig. 63(l),(3) P’) 
The oesophageal pump is shaped rather like the bulb of a Higginson’s syringe with a 
bulbous posterior portion and a thin forward extension. The swollen portion is situated 
posteriorly to the brain, the narrow anterior portion occupies the narrow passage left in 
the imago between the cerebral lobes and the sub-oesophageal ganglion. The organ consists 
of three plates, one dorsal and two ventro-lateral. The plates are wide and fusiform in the 
bulbous portion, becoming narrow and elongated to form the narrow extension. They are 
all very similar in shape, with a thickened area medianly and thinner borders that are 
curved outwardly where they are connected by membrane. The curled edges are continued 
along the narrow portion, giving a curious effect in section to the anterior part of the organ. 
It is clear from the appearance of the plates in section that the organ must be capable of 
considerable expansion when these are dragged apart by the powerful muscles inserted 
into them. These are the dorsal and ventro-lateral dilator muscles taking origin respec- 
tively from the occipital and latero-ventral regions of the head capsule. At the anterior 
end of the narrow portion the area between the two ventro-lateral plates forming the floor 
is, as noted by Thompson, flat. It is also somewhat sclerotised so that it almost forms a 
narrow fourth plate. 
Posteriorly each of the plates ends in a somewhat thinner manner just before con- 
tinuing into the soft walls of the oesophagus. On this area there arise backwardly pro- 
jecting hairs forming what amounts to a valve, the oesophageal valve (Fig. 65 (5)). As 
ALIMENTARY CANAL 
figured by Nuttall and Shipley in Anopheles maculipennis the hairs appear as tufts arising 
from circular pale depressions. In ALides aegypti a certain number of tufts arise from the 
raised margins of circular depressions. Others arise in tufts from less definite thickenings. 
The hairs are of considerable length and for the most part have a sinuous course. Just 
beyond the valve there is a marked annular muscle forming a sphincter. 
The organ in the male is essentially similar, but with the anterior narrow portion longer 
and somewhat thicker relatively to the posterior part than in the female. The bulbous 
posterior part is also somewhat smaller even allowing for the smaller size of the male 
mosquito. Thompson has estimated that the female pump in Culex stimulans has a capacity 
of 0~002-0~004 mm.3 and that of the largest male a capacity of 0.0008 mm.3. In A&Zes 
aegypti the female bulbous portion measures about 0*3-O-35 mm. in length and the narrow 
portion measures in a straight line about O-1 8 mm. The corresponding measurements in 
the male are 0.18 and 0.20 nun. 
The oesophageal pump has been termed the ‘ sucking pump’ or antlia by Thompson; 
pharynx by Sinton and Covell; oesophageal pump by Jobling in Culicoides; and posterior 
pharynx by Snodgrass (1935), and by Robinson (1939) in Anopheles. Most authors 
recognise it as a modified portion of the oesophagus. 
OESOPHAGUS, DIVERTICULA AND CARDIA (Fig.65) 
The oesophagus is a short soft-walled muscular tube passing between the oesophageal 
pump and the cardia. Anteriorly, following upon the oesophageal valve, it is narrow and 
encircled by a muscular band forming an annulus. Posteriorly it becomes more dilated and 
in sections appears either distended and somewhat cone-shaped with a wide base at the 
cardia or thrown into longitudinal folds. It may in the latter case give the appearance of 
forming a ventral pouch. Its walls consist of an inner layer of epithelium which may appear 
columnar (especially at the narrow anterior end), cubical or flattened depending on the 
degree of distension. There are spindle-shaped circular muscular fibres externally with 
some longitudinal fibres especially towards the posterior end. In dissections it rarely 
comes away with the other viscera. 
At the posterior end of the oesophagus just anterior to its junction with the cardia are 
the openings of the diverticula. The dorsal diverticula are relatively small with narrow 
openings and directed anteriorly in the median space between the dorso-ventral and under 
the longitudinal indirect wing muscles. From their position it has been thought that they 
may yield up glucose from their contents to these muscles, so providing extra energy for 
flight (Hocking, 1953), though the impervious nature of their walls would seem against 
such a view. The ventral diverticulum is very much larger. It lies in the middle line ventral 
to the mid-gut and dorsal to the ventral nerve chain. It varies much in size, depending 
upon its air content, and when distended may reach as far back as the sixth abdominal 
segment and if excessively inflated may cause the whole abdomen to be swollen as after a 
blood meal. It plays an important role as already described in relation to the blood feed, 
but is equally large in the male where blood is not taken. 
Usually both the ventral and dorsal diverticula appear as transparent lobulated sacs 
filled with bubbles of air of various sizes (Fig. 65 (1)) or, if collapsed, as solid wrinkled 
organs. Their walls consist of thin transparent membrane which is highly elastic and, 
except when fully distended, is thrown into innumerable small folds. In fresh prepara- 
573 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
tions this plicated appearance is very characteristic and may simulate sporozoites seen in 
mass. In sections the walls are seen to consist of an inner layer of epithelium with small 
nuclei and an outer elasto-muscular layer. That this outer layer is at least in part muscular 
is shown by the fact that when distended with sugary fluid and examined in salt solution 
the diverticula may, as noted by Nuttall and Shipley, exhibit peristalsis. The microscopical 
appearances also indicate the presence of muscular fibres. These consist of rather broad 
flat bands passing circularly around the sac and ending in branches consisting of small iso- 
lated fibres. The bands are spaced at regular and rather considerable intervals and are 
arranged so that the branched ends and unbranched thicker parts alternate (Fig. 65 (3)). 
Nuttall and Shipley give an instructive figure showing a diverticulum dissected out after a 
full meal on sugary fluid, the organ allowed to dry externally and stained with fuchsin. 
The fibres noted above are slightly illuminated under polarised light, but not strikingly as 
are skeletal muscle fibres, a character they share with muscles of the mid-gut and some 
other structures, for example the heart. Besides the terminal branches there are numerous 
fine cross fibres linking the muscular bands. According to Thompson these are narrow 
folds in the membrane, but though such folds may be in part present these cross bands 
appear to be largely muscular in nature forming with the larger fibres an arrangement not 
unlike a spider’s web (Fig. 65 (4)). 
A peculiar character of the diverticula commented upon by Nuttall and Shipley is the 
extreme imperviousness of their walls to passage of water. Dissected out on a slide and 
allowed to dry at room temperature these authors found that the diverticula of Anopheles 
maculipennis still retained fluid after some months. 
The diverticula are equally present in the male and appear if anything even propor- 
tionately somewhat larger. 
At the junction of the oesophagus with the mid-gut is the structure here termed cardia. 
1 
2 
9 
10 Figure 65. Alimentary canal. 
Alimentary canal as displayed when drawn out in dissection. 
Mid-gut as flattened for examination, showing tracheal branches from the abdominal 
spiracles and scalloping of edges due to constriction by circular muscle fibres. 
Portion of flattened diverticulum showing muscle fibres as shown by polarised light. 
Thin portion of wall of diverticulum showing nuclei of epithelial layer and branched muscle 
fibres. 
Showing arrangement of backwardly directed hair tufts of oesophageal valve. 
Proventriculus (cardia) of male in coronal section. That of the female is essentially similar 
but somewhat larger. 
A, section of wall of mid-gut in stretched condition (from newly emerged female with dis- 
tended gut); B, epithelium of mid-gut as usually seen; c, the same in tangential section. 
Pyloric valve and ampulla. a, thickening of wall of mid-gut around opening; b, muscular 
sphincter; c, fold in wall of ampulla; d, muscle fibres extending from wall of ampulla to 
mid-gut. 
Spines on intima of ampulla. 
A, Transverse section of ileum showing cubical epithelium. B, longitudinal section of junction 
of ileum with rectum. 
Lettering : am, pyloric ampulla ; Ca, cardia ; Dd, dorsal diverticulum ; Dv, ventral diverticulum; 
L, ileum; Mg, mid-gut ; Aft, Malpighian tubule; Oe, oesophagus ; ov, ovary; Rc, rectum; 
spm, spermathecae. 
574 
--du . :*. . . * ,:* 
: ,.-: . . . 
.:.F;;.. . . 
@ . ._ . . 
6 
Q 
: . . . . . . . :* . :, -. . .- : 
‘- ‘_ a:..: 
es’. . ‘H c 
4 . 1 0-l mm. , 
Figure 65 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
This is a thickened portion at the anterior end of the mid-gut formed partly from the 
cardiac portion of the mid-gut and partly from invagination of the oesophageal walls 
(Fig. 65 (I), (6) Ca). It has, therefore, essentially the structure of the so-called proventri- 
culus of the larva though less developed and lacking the blood sinus. It shows the same 
folds with the recessed angles which in the larva give rise to the peritrophic membrane, a 
structure which as noted in the next subsection if present at all in the adult mosquito is seen 
only after a blood feed. Though in the mosquito it is commonly termed the proventriculus 
it would seem that this organ should more correctly be termed the cardia, the term pro- 
ventriculus being, according to Snodgrass, applied to a structure situated more anteriorly 
and especially well developed in mandibulate insects where it may be supplied with chitinous 
teeth and form a gizzard. 
MID-GUT, PYLORIC AMPULLA AND ILEUM (Fig.65) 
The mid-gut extends from the cardia situated in the prothorax to the fifth abdominal 
segment, or when fully distended to the sixth segment. All trace of gastric caeca so con- 
spicuous in the larva at the cardiac end of the organ have disappeared in the adult and 
following upon the small swollen portion forming the cardia the mid-gut consists of two 
portions, namely an anterior long and narrow portion lying mainly in the thorax and a 
posterior swollen portion situated in the abdomen which alone undergoes distension when 
a blood meal has been taken or, in the newly hatched insect, when it is filled with air 
(Fig. 65 (1) Mg). The anterior portion remains under all conditions a narrow tubular 
structure. The posterior portion when empty is fusiform in shape and usually thrown into 
some longitudinal folds. When distended it may be ballooned to occupy most of the 
swollen abdomen with its walls greatly thinned. Both the narrow and the distensible 
portions are very similar in structure and consist of an inner epithelial layer with its base- 
ment membrane on which there are sparse circular and longitudinal muscular fibres. In 
addition, externally there are tracheal cells from which numerous tracheoles pass on to the 
surface of the organ. The epithelium appears as columnar, cubical or flattened cells de- 
pending upon the condition of the organ, that lining the anterior narrow portion being 
usually uniformly cubical whilst when fully distended the epithelium may be stretched and 
flattened to an extreme degree (Fig. 65 (7)). On the inner aspect of the cells is the charac- 
teristic striated border, the degree to which the striations are evident depending to a large 
extent upon the fixation and staining, but possibly also on the condition under which the 
organ is examined (Fig. 65 (7) b). The muscle fibres of the outer layer are not conspicuous 
and seem to be less marked than in the mid-gut of Anopheles. They consist of circular and 
longitudinal fibres which form an open rectangular network. According to Grassi the 
muscle fibres in the mid-gut of Anopheles appear to be embedded in the basement mem- 
brane (elasto-muscular tunic of Grassi). They are striated but not conspicuously so and are 
demonstrated poorly by polarised light. No peritrophic membrane corresponding to the 
conspicuous cylinder in the larva is normally present; but formation of a membrane after 
a blood meal has been described by Jaguzhinskaya (1940) and by Rajindar Pal (1943), in 
Anopheles, and a similar membrane may be seen in AL;des aegypti limiting the blood mass 
after a feed. Whether this is strictly comparable with the peritrophic membrane and how 
it is secreted requires further study. The mid-gut of the male is similar to that of the female 
except that the swollen portion is much less marked. It has a well-marked cardia (Fig. 65 (6)). 
The pyloric ampulla is a short bulbous thin-walled portion of the hind-gut following 
576 
ALIMENTARY CANAL 
immediately upon the mid-gut (Fig. 65 (1) am). Into it open the five Malpighian tubules, 
one dorsal and two on each side, one dorsal and one ventrally situated. The opening from 
the mid-gut is narrow and around it the epithelium of the mid-gut is thickened to form a 
fold. The ampulla shows a still more pronounced fold. Between these two folds is an area 
of circular muscle forming a strong sphincter (Fig. 65 (8) b). Just distal to the sphincter the 
Malpighian tubules enter. Where these tubules enter, the characteristic cells of the tubules 
are replaced by a mass of cells with small nuclei, the tissue at the point of entry forming a 
posteriorly projecting mass. The whole forms a very marked valve. The walls of the ampulla 
consist of an inner small-celled epithelial lining and in its more distal part a layer of circular 
muscle fibres continued from the ileum. Proximal and distal to the valve the walls are very 
thin and almost devoid of any muscular layer. Longitudinal fibres pass from the distal 
parts of the wall to the mid-gut often at some distance from the sphincter opening 
(Fig. 65 (8) d). The epithelium has a fine cuticular lining which carries backwardly pro- 
jecting spinous processes (Fig. 65 (9)). These have been referred to by a number of observers 
(Eysell, 1905; De Boissezon, 1930a; Richins, 1938; Wigglesworth, 1942; Trembley, 1951). 
They give the ampulla as seen in dissections a characteristic appearance (Fig. 65 (2)). They 
extend also some little way along the ileum, the passage from ampulla to ileum not being 
well defined. The spines are not unlike those seen on the larval cuticle in some situations, 
namely a thorn-like base which is continued into from four to six fine spines projecting in 
a horizontal plane. 
From the pyloric ampulla to the rectum is a portion of the hind-gut sometimes termed 
ileo-colon. It, however, no longer shows the marked distinction into ileum and colon as 
seen in the larva, and as noted by Thompson the colon of the larva is replaced by growth 
from the ileum and rectum during metamorphosis. The term ileum is therefore preferable, 
though some change in character does occur in its passage to the rectum, the epithelial 
cells tending to be more massive in its hinder portion. It is, throughout its course, a narrow 
tube and very heavily supplied with muscular bands frequently showing active peristalsis 
when dissected out in saline. After leaving the ampulla it is at first directed posteriorly and 
somewhat ventrally. It then forms a loop directed dorsally which terminates in the rectum 
close beneath the seventh tergite. Its walls consist of an inner layer of rather large cubical 
epithelium which is thrown into longitudinal folds and an outer muscular layer consisting 
of more or less circularly disposed broad and well-striated muscular fibres. Longitudinal 
fibres seem to be present, but the actual relation of the fibres is difficult to determine with 
certainty. Very frequently a circular fibre is seen tending to become longitudinal, and it is 
possible fibres may be more or less spirally arranged. At the junction of the ileum with the 
rectum the swollen epithelial cells of the former become replaced by the small, flattened 
epithelium of the latter, the contrast being very marked (Fig. 65 (10) b). 
THE RECTUM AND RECTAL PAPILLAE (Fig.66(1-4)) 
The rectum consists of two portions of about equal length, a dilated proximal portion, 
rectal sac (Rc’) situated in the seventh abdominal segment and in which the rectal papillae 
are situated, and a distal narrow portion extending to the anus. The walls of the rectal sac 
consist of a thin inconspicuous epithelium and an outer layer of discrete broad bands of 
striated muscle fibres (Fig. 66 (1) m). The distal portion of the rectum has a thin epithelial 
layer with a much folded and wrinkled intima and an outer layer of muscle bands similar 
37 577 CH 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
though shorter than those of the rectal sac. Towards its termination, besides numerous 
muscular fibres in its coat, there are fibres of skeletal type taking origin from surrounding 
parts and inserted into the tube. The anal opening is in the membrane between the bases of 
the cerci. Small spicules may be present on the intima. 
The rectal papillae, sometimes called the rectal glands, are in the female six in number. 
They consist of conical papillae each formed of a number of large cells with clear cyto- 
plasm and large nuclei arranged around a central core-like space. They take origin from 
the dorsal wall of the rectal sac, one posteriorly, two pairs side by side medianly and one 
situated anteriorly (Fig. 66 (2)). Their bases lie close beneath the posterior end of the heart 
and are freely exposed to the body cavity, the gut wall being attached around their base and 
not extending over this (Fig. 66 (3)). A large tracheal branch on each side comes from the 
spiracle complex of the seventh segment and, passing behind the rectal sac, gives off leashes 
of branches some of which enter and pass up the core-like centres of the papillae to break 
up into a network of tracheoles in the substance of the papillae (Fig. 66 (4)). The whole 
complex has a certain resemblance to the colon of the larva with its large clear cells and to 
the tracheal network of the larval anal papillae. 
In the male the rectal parts are very similar to those in the female but, as noted by Engel 
(1924), only four rectal papillae are present. These are arranged as in the female, but there 
is only one median pair. 
THE SALIVARY GLANDS AND DUCTS (Fig.66(5-9)) 
The correct name for such glands in general insect terminology should be labial glands. 
But the name salivary glands has been so largely employed that it seems undesirable to 
use another name, especially as they are the only glands in the mosquito that could merit 
the name salivary. 
Figure 66. Rectum and salivary gland. 
Sagittal section through rectum showing rectal papillae arising from dorsal wall of the rectal 
sac. The section shows relation to segmental parts and to pericardial cells and heart. 
Coronal section through rectal sac showing position of the six rectal papillae in the female. 
In the male only one pair is present medianly. 
Section through rectal papilla. a, Base of papilla exposed to body cavity; b, wall of rectal 
sac attached to periphery of the papillary base with a nucleus in the papilla at this point; 
c, position where tracheal vessels break up to form tracheoles passing into papilla. 
Rectal papilla showing tracheoles. a, position where large tracheal branches break up to 
give off tracheoles supplying the papilla. 
Transverse section through anterior portion of thorax to show anatomical relations of the 
salivary acini. The three acini on each side are shown in black. 
Salivary glands of &Yes aegypti as seen in dissection. a, proximal portion of lateral acinus; 
b, lateral acinus; c, median acinus; d, anterior portion of median acinus. 
A, transverse section of acinus in newly emerged female; B, the same of male acinus. 
Portion of acinus of 24-hour-old female showing beginning of formation of secretion. 
Transverse section of mat,ure acinus distended with secretion. From an ovipositing female. 
Lettering: asd, intra-acinar duct; Dv, ventral diverticulum; ht, heart; Mg, mid-gut; m, muscle 
fibres; nu, nucleus ; pc, pericardial cell; Rc’, rectal sac; rp, rectal papillae; sd, salivary duct ; 
set, secretion; sg, salivary gland; t, trachea; VII, VIII, abdominal segments. 

IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
The glands of Agdes aegypti resemble in general those of Anopheles, but are smaller and 
rather more stumpy. They are readily dissected out by the technique in general use as 
previously described. Their appearance so dissected is shown in Fig. 66 (6). The glands of 
each side consist of three lobes or acini, a median and two lateral. These are linked at their 
anterior ends by the junction of their ducts forming the salivary duct of its side (sd). The 
glands lie surrounded by and largely embedded in lobes of the fat-body close behind the 
prosternum, their anterior ends close to the base of the neck through which the salivary 
ducts pass to unite beneath the sub-oesophageal ganglion to form the common salivary duct 
(csd). The acini, coiled somewhat irregularly, extend backwards to lie alongside and close to 
the hinder end of the oesophagus and cardia and for a short distance by the side of the 
anterior portion of the mid-gut. The three acini lie in dorso-ventral series with the upper 
lateral acinus somewhat external to the others and the lower lateral acinus closer to the 
middle line, where its termination comes to lie close up to the ventral diverticulum 
(Fig. 66 (5)). 
Each acinus is in the form of an elongated cylinder in the centre of which is a duct with 
thick cuticular lining which may have taenidia much resembling those of tracheae, intra- 
acinar duct (asd). In Anupheles the median acinus is shorter, more sacculated and the intra- 
acinar duct markedly dilated. In A2des aegypti and most Culicini the median acinus, 
though shorter than the lateral acini, is not ampullated and, as usually described, has the 
intra-acinar duct of uniform diameter and extending to the end of the acinus. Recently 
Bhatia, Wattal and Kalra have studied the intra-acinar ducts in different species of 
mosquitoes including AFdes aegypti. In Anopheles, in the female, the intra-acinar duct of 
the median acinus dilates immediately after entering the lobe, its walls losing their taenidia. 
In the lateral lobes the intra-acinar ducts after running for about half the length of the 
acinus dilate somewhat and towards the end of the lobe may become invisible. As in the 
median acinus the ducts in the lateral acini lose their taenidia on entering the lobe. In 
Culex fatigans the intra-acinar ducts in the female are narrow with taenidial lining through- 
out their length in all three acini. In the female in Ai;des aegypti the duct of the median 
acinus is somewhat dilated and without taenidia when it enters the lobe. In the lateral acini 
taenidial rings surround the ducts for about half their length, their distal half being 
slightly dilated and without taenidia. In the male Anopheles the intra-acinar duct of the 
median acinus passes to the end of the acinus without forming an ampulla. In the males of 
CuZex fatigans and Atides aegypti the ducts in all three acini are narrow and with taenidia 
to their terminations. In CuZex,fatigans male the median acinus is shorter than the lateral 
acini. In A?des aegypti male the three acini are about of equal length. The authors point 
out that these and other differences may be of great value in their bearing on the system- 
atics of mosquitoes. * 
As usually depicted the three intra-acinar ducts are shown meeting and joining up at one 
point. Bhatia et al., however, find that this is unusual and that commonly the duct from 
the median acinus joins with one of the lateral acinar ducts and this common portion 
shortly afterwards joins up with the other lateral duct. 
Though in AL;des aegypti the median acinus does not differ from the lateral acini to the 
same extent as in Anopheles, the distinction is quite apparent in that the median acinus is 
shorter and lacks the swollen anterior portion at the proximal end of the lateral acini. In 
* The authors note that dissecting out the glands in O-68 per cent saline and mounting them 
glycerine gives better results than the conventional fixatives, stains and other mounting media. in 60-70 per cent 
580 
ALIMENTARY CANAL 
Anopkeles this swollen proximal portion differs considerably in structure from the rest of 
the acinus. In the freshly dissected gland it is usually more bulky than the remainder of 
the acinus, though in salt solution it is apt to become shrunken and narrower. It also shows 
other differences as noted by Christophers (1901), including the presence of small exten- 
sions from the duct into the cells. In A&&s aegypti the differentiation of such an anterior 
portion is also apparent as indicated in Fig. 66 (6) a by greater bulk, by being separated 
by some degree of constriction from the rest of the acinus and by somewhat darker staining. 
In the median acinus this portion seems to be represented by a small and narrow rather 
conical portion of gland lying between the swollen ends of the two lateral acini (Fig. 66 (6) d). 
In structure each acinus consists of a single layer of cells disposed around the central 
duct. The appearance of these differs depending on the age of the mosquito. Immediately 
following emergence the cells are small, deeply staining, coarsely granular and with a 
centrally situated nucleus. Usually there are considerable clefts between contiguous cells. 
The nucleus is noticeable as having an unusually large central deeply stained body. By 
24 hours clear vacuoles have formed occupying the inner portions of the cells and in the 
lateral acini especially there may be numerous small globules disposed around the duct. 
By the second day the vacuoles of secretion have largely filled the cells, the cytoplasm and 
flattened nucleus being pushed to the cell periphery. In later stages the cells are greatly 
distended with secretion, the acini being now much swollen, strongly refringent and with a 
noticeable rigidity. If crushed the glands in the fresh state exude massive quantities of oily- 
looking secretion, leaving the gland substance relatively transparent and inconspicuous. 
A feature of the glands noted by Shute (1940) is the frequent presence of small accessory 
outgrowths or duplication of the normally cylindrical acini. This seems to be particularly 
the case in A. aegypti where most specimens show some degree of this condition, the 
glands shown in the figure having been selected from a number to avoid a too excessive 
degree of aberration. 
A study of the development of the salivary glands is given by Jensen and Jones (1957). 
The salivary and common salivary ducts consist of a thick chitinous intima with an outer 
layer of somewhat flattened cells. The intima carries raised cuticular thickenings similar to, 
but more pronounced and thicker than, the taenidial markings of tracheal vessels. I have 
not been able to ascertain whether these are distinct rings or whether the thickenings are 
spiral. Usually, however, about every third or fourth band there is an oblique line of 
thickening joining two adjacent bands (Fig. 63 (11)). 
(b) THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
The musculature of imaginal insects is extremely complex and in this respect the mosquito 
is no exception. It is much more complex in the imaginal mosquito than in the larva, and 
in the imago it appears to be composed of two elements: (1) the original body muscles (of 
Snodgrass and others) as seen in the larva and continued or reconstituted in the imago; 
and (2) newly formed muscles, the result of development of elements in the imaginal buds 
or of other newly formed muscles in the imago. The muscles of these two systems differ 
markedly in a number of respects and may for convenience of description be referred to 
for want of better terms as those of the protomorphic and neomorphic muscular systems 
respectively. 
Muscles of the protomorphic type closely resemble the larval body muscles in that they 
581 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
tend to be long and often thread-like, whereas the neomorphic type are most commonly 
massive or fan-like. Very marked too is the difference in the appearance of the two types 
in fixed and stained sections. Muscles of the protomorphic type are pale, tend to show 
indefinite structure with wide sarcolemma and few nuclei. They usually show poor stria- 
tion. Muscles of the neomorphic type on the contrary usually stain much more deeply 
and show marked structural characters. Thus the muscles of the neomorphic type commonly 
consist of tubular-form fibres plentifully supplied with nuclei and markedly striated. The 
neomorphic type also for the most part take origin from points or areas on the various 
cuticular sclerites; the protomorphic strands on the other hand tend to pass from inter- 
segmental line to intersegmental line or, where not at the surface, to pass between muscular 
knots as have been described in the larval musculature. 
In the head there is little evidence of the early type, but one important muscle, the 
tentorially inserted flexor of the head, would appear to belong to the series. In the thorax 
this series is wholly subordinated to the new type of muscle, but is nevertheless still present 
as strands of muscle lying above and below the alimentary canal and associated with 
ventral transverse muscles as in the larva. The musculature of the abdomen in the image is 
almost purely protomorphic and closely resembles that of the larval abdomen. 
The musculature of the head has been that mostly studied, since it possesses a special 
interest in relation to the mechanism of feeding and in some other respects. Also the 
number of muscles is not too great to make a close study of each possible. In the present 
account therefore the muscles of the head have been numbered and described seriatim 
and named according to their functions. The thoracic muscles of the mosquito imago have 
not, so far as I am aware, been described as a whole and their number is very great, so that 
Figure 67. Muscles of the head. 
1 Longitudinal view of head of imago showing the musculature. a, frontal ganglion; b, scape 
of far side; c, annular muscle of oesophagus. 
The muscles, indicated by their numbers as given in the text, are shown as though seen in a 
bisected head viewed from the right side. With a few exceptions they are therefore those of the 
left side. For clearness a few are shown as if to the right of the median line, namely nos. 8, 18 
and 24. The tentorium and maxillary apodemes also are those of the right half of the head. 
Intrinsic muscles of the antenna as seen in coronal section at the level of the base of the pedicel. 
a, scape ; b, base of pedicel showing insertion of muscles; c, antenna1 nerve. 
Coronal section through the clypeus to show musculature. a, invaginated preclypeal edges 
(preclypeal apodeme); b, position of frontal ganglion. 
Coronal section at level of junction of buccal cavity and oesophageal pump. a, posterior end 
of buccal cavity; b, lateral flange of buccal cavity. 
Reconstruction showing anterior end of the tentorium with arrangement of muscles taking 
origin from it. It is as would be seen on an enlarged scale in the first figure were it not hidden 
by the hind end of the buccal cavity. 
Transverse section through apical portion of proboscis to show the labial musculature. 
a, sclerotised tendons. Both the extensor and flexor possess tendons. 
Apical half of labium to show the extensor and flexor muscles. Only one of each is shown on 
their respective sides. The appearance of the muscular bands is that seen under polarised light. 
The tendons do not show up so illuminated. 
Lettering : Bc, buccal cavity; G, gena ; Gs, genal shelf; md, mandible ; mx, maxilla; mxa, 
maxillary apodeme; P’, oesophageal pump; SS, suspensorium; T, tentorium; l-26, muscles as 
given in list of head muscles in the text. 
582 
23 
-8 
a b 
1 095 mm. 1 b 
* U-Q \ 
L @l mm. 1 a 
3 , 01 mm. , 4 
I @lmm. I c mxa ( oeimm. , 6 
Figure 67 
583 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
some form of classification and nomenclature is essential to avoid confusion. The same 
applies to the abdominal muscles where, however, Samtleben’s system serves for their 
naming. 
It will be most convenient in what follows to deal under separate headings with the 
muscles of the head, neck, thorax and abdomen, using such descriptive methods as seem 
suitable in the particular case. 
MUSCLES OF THE HEAD (Fig.67) 
The muscles of the head of the imago have been very fully described in Culex by Thompson 
(1905), who has also given much information regarding homologies of the imaginal with 
the larval muscles. The muscles in Anopheles, more especially those of the mouth-parts, 
have also been well described by Robinson (1939). Very helpful also is the description by 
Jobling (1928) of the head muscles in Culicoides. * 
Below are given the muscles of the head as seen in Agdes aegypti, the numbers given to 
them being those by which they will be referred to and by which they are indicated in the 
figures. In describing the origins and insertions the head is considered as arranged dorso- 
ventrally in line with the body so that the frons is posterior to the clypeus and the Zabrum 
dorsal to the Zabium. The site of origin is given first, followed by the site of insertion unless 
it is uncertain which- end of the muscle is which, when it is given as ‘between’ the sites 
given. A name has been given where muscles have an obvious function, in most cases as 
they have been named by previous authors. Thompson’s nomenclature has been largely 
used, though names by Robinson or Jobling or new names have been given where such 
seem more suitable. 
Muscles of the antennae (Fig. 67 (l), (2)) 
1. Adductor of the scape. Dorsal surface of tentorium towards its anterior end to anterior 
portion of basal ring of antenna (scape). (Inner antenna1 of Thompson; adductor of the scape 
of Jobling.) 
2. Abductor of the scape. Dorsal surface of the tentorium external to the adductor to outer 
portion of scape. 
3. Intrinsic muscles of the antennae (3 a-3 d). Muscular fibres from scape to margins of pedicel 
(see note 1). 
Muscles of the labrum and clypeus 
4. Retractors of the Zabrum. Fan-shaped muscles composed of numerous separate bundles on 
each side of middle line of dorsum of clypeus converging to base of dorsal plate of labrum at its 
junction with the preclypeus in the preclypeal pouch. (Labral muscle of Thompson; retractor of 
the labrum of Robinson; elevator of the labrum epipharynx of Jobling.) 
5. Elevators of the Zabrum. Cornua of preclypeal apodeme to sides of ventral plate of the 
labrum in its basal portion. (Epipharyngeal muscle of Thompson; elevator of the labrum of 
Robinson.) 
6. Elevators of the anterior hard palate. Sides of clypeus a little external to the middle line 
passing between the preclypeal cornua to sides of anterior hard palate. (No. 1 elevators of the 
palate of Thompson; possibly the dilators of the pharynx of Jobling.) 
7. Elevators of the roof of the buccal cavity. Four parallel muscles, 7 a-7d, on each side from 
a line along the side of the clypeus to the sides of the roof of the buccal cavity from just behind 
the anterior hard palate to the posterior end of the organ. 7a-7 b are inserted into the membranous 
* See also earlier work by Annett, Dutton and Elliott (1901), Nuttall and Shipley (1901, 1903), Kulagin (1905), 
and the still earlier work of Dimmock (1881, 1883). 
584 
MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
roof, 7c into the posterior hard palate and 7d into the hummocky area behind the posterior hard 
palate. 7d lies just in front of the frontal ganglion and passes beneath the ganglion to its insertion. 
(Elevators 2-5 of the palate of Thompson; dilators of the pharynx of Jobling in part.) 
Muscles of the mandibles 
8. Mandibular muscle. A small muscle on each side from the floor of the tentorium at its 
anterior end to the base of the mandible. These small muscles are conspicuous in transverse 
sections through the fore part of the head situated on each side of the buccal cavity and are so 
shown in the figure by Annett, Dutton and Elliott. (Mandibular muscles of Thompson; re- 
tractors of the mandibles of Robinson.) (See note 2.) 
9. Subocular muscles. Minute muscles arising on each side from the postgenal area a little 
anterior to the foremost lateral dilator muscles of the oesophageal pump and passing forwards 
internal to the lower part of the compound eye of its side and according to Thompson inserted 
into the tentorium immediately caudal of the origin of the dorsal retractor of the maxilla (see 
note 3). (Subocular muscle of Thompson.) 
Muscles of the maxillae 
10. Ventral retractors of the maxillae. A large muscle on each side arising from the occipital 
area ventrally just external to the posterior end of the tentorium and inserted into the anterior 
end of the maxillary apodeme. It lies in most of its course along the outer side of the maxillary 
apodeme. (Retractors of the maxillae of Thompson; ventral retractors of the maxillae of 
Robinson; retractors of the galeae of Jobling.) 
11. Dorsal retractors of the maxillae. A large muscle on each side from the inner surface of the 
tentorium about its middle to the spur of the maxilla. (Double retractors of the maxillae of 
Thompson; dorsal retractors of the maxillae of Robinson.) 
12. Protractors of the maxiZZae. A large muscle on each side from the inner surface of the 
tentorium for much of its extent to the posterior end of the maxillary apodeme. (Protractor 
maximus of Thompson; protractor of the maxillae of Robinson; to some extent protractor of the 
stipes of Jobling.) 
13. Elevators of the maxillary pulps. Very small muscles present in the male of AC;des aegypti. 
Anterior end of maxillary apodemes to base of palps dorsally. (Elevators of the palps of Robinson 
and of Jobling.) 
14. Accessory elevators of the pulps. Muscular fibres conspicuous in the male, present to a less 
extent in the female, in basal segment of palps. (Accessory elevators of the palps of Robinson.) 
(Not figured.) 
Muscles of the labium 
15. Retractors of the Zabium. Small muscles on each side from the posterior ends of the maxil- 
lary apodemes to posterior margins of the labium. (Maxillo-labial muscles of Thompson; 
retractors of the labium of Robinson and of Jobling.) 
16. Extensors of the labella. Muscular fibres arising as series of strands from the lateral wall of 
the distal part of the labium and inserted into the base of the labella on their outer sides. 
17. Flexors of the ZabeZZa. Muscle fibres from ventro-lateral wall of labium on each side towards 
its distal end to base of labella at their inner ventral angles. (Flexors of the labella of Robinson.) 
(See note 4.) 
Muscles of the salivary pump 
18. Salivary muscle. A stout muscle on each side arising from the lateral and ventral flanges 
of the buccal cavity and inserted into the posterior face of the salivary pump. (Hypopharyngeal 
muscles of Thompson; dilators of the salivary syringe of Robinson; salivary pump muscles of 
Jobling.) 
Muscles of the buccal cavity 
19. VaZvuZar muscles. Two small muscles from middle line of frons between the scapes of the 
antennae to membrane at junction of buccal cavity and oesophageal pump. (Valvular muscles of 
Thompson.) 
585 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
20. Lateral retractors of the buccal cavity. Stout bulky muscles arising on each side from inner 
surface of the tentorium at its anterior end and inserted into the lateral flanges of the buccal 
cavity. (Lateral pharyngeal muscles of Thompson.) 
21. Dorsal retractors of the buccal cavity. Median line of frons between the dorsal ocelli to 
lateral flanges of the buccal cavity. (Ascending pharyngeals of Thompson; retractors of the 
pharynx of Jobling.) 
22. Accessory dorsal retractors. A small muscle on each side arising in common with 21 but 
inserted into the anterior end of the dorsal plate of the oesophageal pump. (Anterior dorsal 
dilator of the pump of Thompson and of Jobling.) (See under ‘Anterior termination of the aorta’ 
ch. XXVII, p. 618.) 
Muscles of the oesophageal pump 
23. Dorsal dilators of the oesophageal pump. Two large flat muscles arising close together on 
each side of the median line of the occiput and inserted into the dorsal plate of the pump. (Posterior 
dorsal dilator of the oesophageal pump of Thompson and of Jobling.) 
24. Lateral dilators of the oesophageal pump. Five muscular masses on each side, one behind 
the other, arising in series from the postgenal areas and inserted into the lateral plates of the 
oesophageal pump. (Lateral dilators of Thompson and of Jobling.) 
Muscles from the neck and thorax 
25. Depressor muscle of the head. Enters the head from the neck on each side of the ventral 
nerve connectives and inserted towards the anterior end of the tentorium on its outer surface. 
A long muscle with distinctive characters and the only large single tubular muscle in the head. 
(See also under ‘Muscles of the thorax p. 588)‘. (Tentorial muscle of Thompson; depressor 
muscle of the head of Jobling.) 
26. A muscle from the prothorax in the form of a thin tendon that closely accompanies muscle 
25, but is inserted into the spur on the tentorium near its posterior end. For further particulars 
see under muscles of the thorax. 
Note 1. The intrinsic muscles of the antenna, that is those passing from the scape to the 
margins of the pedicel, consist of numerous fibres arranged as shown in Fig. 67 (2), 
a fan-like arrangement passing from the inner and posterior part of the scape beneath the 
pedicel to be inserted along the inner half of its anterior border (3a). External to this fan 
is a single small stout muscle (3 b). Externally in the same plane are fibres from the outer 
posterior part of the scape to the outer anterior border of the pedicel (3 c). 3 d is not 
strictly an intrinsic muscle but consists of fibres from the edge of the ocular sclerite near 
the dorsal ocellus passing to the outer posterior part of the scape. 
Note 2. In the larva the mandibular muscles (adductor and abductor bundles) arise 
from the postgenal area behind the eyes. It is therefore strange to find the only mandibular 
muscle in the imago arising from the anterior end of the tentorium. In Culicoides, however, 
a muscle is described by Jobling additional to the large adductor and abductor muscles 
arising from the genal area. This has much of the character of the mandibular muscle in 
the mosquito. In Culicoides all three muscles are well developed, as also is the mandible. 
In the mosquito the mandible is obsolescent, especially so in AZdes aegypti, where it termi- 
nates in a flat lanceolate tip devoid of any teeth. 
Note 3. This small muscle has been traced to below the tentorium, but its insertion has 
not with certainty been traced by me. In A. aegypti it does not seem to be inserted into the 
tentorium and it is suspected that it may represent an obsolescent strand representing the 
larval adductor or abductor muscles (see note 2). 
Note 4. These muscles in A. aegypti are as figured by Robinson for Anopheles. Robinson, 
however, gives as the origin of the flexor muscles the dorsal aspect of the labium. I think 
586 
MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
this may be a slip of the pen. They clearly arise ventro-laterally. Robinson also describes 
the muscle as ending in a long tendon passing into the labella. In Ak’des aegypti they appear 
to be inserted as given in the synopsis. The muscles are shown up by polarised light but less 
vividly than the usual systemic muscles. 
A reference may be made to the relation of the larval to the imaginal musculature of the 
head. As a generalisation it may be said that the larval muscles are either completely 
histolysed and disappear, or in certain cases follow through from the larva to the imago but 
much modified. Yet even when new muscles are formed in the imago these often show an 
homology with those of the larva. With the disappearance of the massive labral structures 
of the larva with their feeding brushes and apodemes and associated muscles and the much 
contracted state of these parts in the imago, any larval muscles still represented in the imago 
must be looked for as small and insignificant ones crowded together in the clypeus. Con- 
trariwise, as a result of the appearance of the large oesophageal pump small insignificant 
muscles in the rear parts of the larval head may be expected to be large and important 
muscles. 
Of the twenty-six imaginal head muscles, eleven (10, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 
and 26) appear to be larval muscles carried through, five (1, 4, 5, 6 and 7) appear to be 
histolysed but represented by imaginal muscles, and the remaining ten new imaginal 
muscles not represented in the larva. 
MUSCLES OF THE NECK (Fig. 68 (3),(4)) 
A large part of the neck laterally is covered by the broad flat cervical sclerites, hinged 
dorsally to the sides of the occipital prominence and ventrally to the propleura. Anterior 
and posterior to the cervical plates the neck is membranous and normally thrown into 
deep folds, one in front of and one behind the sclerite. The muscles of the neck are given in 
tabular form below with the numbers by which they will be referred to and by which they 
are indicated in the figures. Their origins and insertions and their general positions are 
indicated in Fig. 68 (3). 
The largest muscles are those from the occiput to the cervical sclerites. Of special interest 
are the decussating muscles 29 recalling a similar condition in the larva. The muscles 
assigned to the protomorphic system are those connecting with this system in the pro- 
thorax as described later. Among them are the long muscles 25 from the tentorium in the 
head traversing the neck to pass to the ends of the prothoracic ventral transverse muscle 
in the thorax. 
Though not strictly a cervical muscle it is convenient here to include muscle 38 (pronotal 
muscle) which takes origin from the walls of the prothoracic lobe (anterior pronotum) and 
converges to be inserted into the narrow neck linking this with the propleura. Its function 
is not very clear, though it is a fairly large muscle. Possibly it has to do with giving support 
to the head. 
The following are the muscles of the neck : 
Number 
Occipital protuberance 
to cervical sclerite : anterior 
to cervical sclerite : posterior 
to cornu of first phragma : decussating 
to cornu of first phragma : lateral 
587 27 
28 
29 
30 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
Cervical sclerite Number 
anterior border to posterior fold of neck 31 
ventral arm to prothoracic furca 32 
ventral arm to propleura 33 
ventral arm to dorsal knot 34 
Posterior fold of neck 
to first phragma : dorso-lateral 
to first phragma: ventro-lateral 
to dorsal knot 35 
36 
37 
Passing through neck from head* 
as muscle from tentorium anteriorly 
as tendon from posterior spine of tentorium 25 
26 
* Already given under muscles of the head. 
MUSCLES OF THE THORAX (Figs. 68, 69) 
For a general description of the thoracic musculature of insects see especially Snodgrass 
(1912,1927,1935); Morison (1927-1929) on the muscles of the honey bee; Dirkes (1928) on 
the imaginal musculature of Psychoda and its development from the larval system; Maki 
(1938) on the thoracic muscles of various orders of insects including Diptera. Among the 
types given by the last-mentioned author is a very detailed study of a tipulid, Ctenacroscelis 
mikado, in which sixty-two numbered muscles are listed for the thorax. So far as I am 
aware no author has described the thoracic musculature of the imaginal mosquito. 
A reference to certain of the wing muscles has, however, been made by Prashad 
(1918). 
For the mosquito ACdees aegypti the number of distinct muscles for the thorax now listed 
is 64. These are set out in tabular form below in four series as they relate to: the wings and 
halteres; the spiracles; the legs ; and the protomorphic series. The table also gives the 
categories as commonly used so far as these seem applicable, for example tergo-pleural, 
Sterno-coxal, etc. In addition their situations, origins and insertions have as far as possible 
been indicated in the figures. Some further information is given in the form of 
notes. 
One interesting point has been brought out by the study of the muscles, namely the extent 
to which characters of the sclerites are shown to be determined by the requirements for 
the attachment of certain muscles. Particularly noticeable in this respect is the shape of 
the sclerite named the posterior pronotum. This gives the necessary surface for the large 
trochanteral muscle of the fore-leg. Another instance is the peculiar-shaped sclerite 
termed the post-spiracular. This seems to be the shape it is to give attachment to the large 
fan-shaped posterior spiracular muscle. Other instances are the paratergite, which appears 
to exist to provide origin for the large quadrangular muscle 44, and the turned-in edge of 
the scutum anterior to this that gives origin to the dorsal spiracular muscle. The charac- 
teristic sternopleuron of the mosquito owes its large size and solid appearance to the 
requirement for attachment of the dorso-ventral indirect wing muscles. Even the whole 
shape of the thorax with its projecting anterior promontory and elongate wedge shape is 
evidently to give sufficient length for the indirect wing muscles. 
Figure 68. Muscles of the thorax. 
Lateral view of thorax showing the indirect wing muscles. 
The same showing other muscles as these would be seen showing through the transparent 
sclerites. The indirect wing muscles have been omitted. 
Muscles of the neck. Lateral view as seen with the neck extended (reconstruction). In the 
middle of the figure the cervical sclerite is shown as though transparent. The posterior part of 
the head is on the left and the position of the prothoracic parts indicated on the right. a, first 
phragma. Extending backwards from it is seen the rod-like apodeme that extends backwards 
from the first phragma behind the posterior pronotum. 
Muscles of the prothorax. The occipital region of the head is on the left, the anterior pronotal 
lobe and its stalk with parts of the thorax on the right. 
The first coxa. Internal view to show muscles. 
The numbers indicated on the figures are those given to the muscles in the tabular statements 
in the text. 
Numbers marked with a dash indicate tendons of correspondingly numbered muscles. The 
number with two dashes (63”) refers to the strap-like thickening into which the tendon proper is 
inserted. 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
The following are the muscles of the thorax: 
A. Muscles of the wings and halteres 
Number 
Indirect wing muscles (note 1) 
Longitudinal (mesothoracic) 
Longitudinal (metathoracic) 
Dorso-ventral, anterior 
Dorso-ventral, posterior 
Transverse (scutellum) * 
Tergo-pleural muscles (note 2) 
Anterior pronotal 
Paratergite to sternopleuron 
Basalar to mesepimeron 
Angle of scutum to sternopleuron 
Axillary, basalar and subalar muscles (note 3) 
Sternopleuron to dens (2nd axillary) 
Mes-epimeron to posterior wing root 
Pleural suture to posterior wing root 
Pleural suture to hamular process 
Pleural suture to mes-epimeral apodeme 
Furco-pleural line to wing root 
Furco-entopleural (note 4) 
Cup of mesofurca to furco-pleural line 
Muscles of the halteres (note 5) 
Elevator of the halter 
Depressor of the halter 
* See under note 1. 39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
38 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52, 53 
54 
55 
56 
B. Muscles of the spiracles (note 6) 
Mesothoracic spiracle 
Ventral : from subspiracular area 
Posterior : from postspiracular sclerite 
Metathoracic spiracle 
Ventral : from metapleuron Number 
58 
59 
60 
C. Thoracic muscles of the legs (note 7) Number 
M-7 
Pro- Meso- Meta- 
Pleuro-trochanteral : with extensor tendon 62, 63 72 80 
Furco-trochanteral : joining extensor tendon 64 73 81 
Coxo-trochanteral 
External surface to coxa (flexor) 65 74 82.t 
Accessory extensor 66 (75) * (83)*t 
Extensor tendon adjustor 67 76 84”r 
Apical 68 77 85f 
* See note 7. 
t Not shown in the figures. 
590 
MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
Number 
I A > 
Pro- Meso- Meta- 
Pleuro-coxal 
Propleural knob to first coxa 69 - - 
Sterno-coxal 
Anterior 70 78 86 
Posterior 71 79 87 
D. Muscles of the protomorphic series (note 8) 
Number 
Dorsal series 
Cervical sclerite to prothoracic dorsal knot 34* 
Dorsum of neck to prothoracic dorsal knot 37* 
Anterior promontory joining muscle 37 88 
Cornu of first phragma to prothoracic dorsal knot 89 
Lateral region of scutum to prothoracic dorsal knot 90 
Prothoracic dorsal transverse 91 
Continuation of dorsal prothoracic strand 92 
Ventral series 
Tentorium to prothoracic ventral knot 
Branch from muscle 90 to prothoracic ventral knot 
Branch from muscle 93 to behind first coxa 
Prothoracic ventral transverse 
Continuation of strand to mesothoracic ventral knot 
Mesothoracic ventral transverse 
Continuation of ventral strand 
* Already given under muscles of the neck. 25t 
93 
94 
95 
96 
975 
98$ 
t Already given under muscles of the head. The muscle of the tendon accompanying this muscle goes to the 
prothoracic furca, not to the ventral knot. 
2 Not shown in the figures. 
Note 1. The indirect wing muscles act on the wings indirectly through changing the shape 
of the thorax. The longitudinal muscles act as depressors and the dorso-ventral as elevators 
of the wings. Both consist of massive muscular bundles more or less rectangular in cross 
section and separated by intervening spaces. These number about twelve on each side. 
The longitudinal muscles occupy the median portion of the dome-shaped upper part of 
the thorax. They extend from the anterior promontory and the dorsum of the scutum for 
about the anterior two-thirds of its extent to the postnotum and its phragma. The series is 
continued beyond the phragma as small short muscles of the same type in the metathorax. 
These pass from the second to the third phragma. 
The dorso-ventral muscles extend from the ventral portion of the thorax to the lateral 
aspects of the scutum. They consist of two separate series, an anterior and a posterior. The 
anterior series extend from the expanded lower portion of the sternopleuron to about the 
middle third of the lateral portions of the scutum. They consist on each side of about 
8-10 muscular bundles. The posterior series pass from the meron to about the posterior 
third of the lateral portions of the scutum. They consist on each side of about 5-6 muscular 
bundles. According to Snodgrass the posterior series are originally tergal remotors 
(extensors) of the middle leg which in Diptera, with removal of the meron from the coxa 
to the thorax, have become indirect wing muscles. 
The indirect wing muscles differ profoundly in their minute structure from all other 
591 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
thoracic muscles, consisting of massed fine fibres with numerous intervening nuclei, whilst 
the limb muscles are usually formed of much larger fibres commonly of tubular type with 
centrally situated nuclei. They differ also in origin, appearing during the late larval and 
pupal stages as new, isolated, sausage-shaped masses resembling foreign bodies which 
eventually attach themselves to the cuticle. 
The small transverse muscle in the scutellum (43) has been placed in the present group 
as it may assist in the deformation of the thorax, but it is more probably an accessory 
pulsatory muscle (see under ‘The circulatory system’, ch. XXVII, p. 619). 
Note 2. The muscles 44 and 45 (along with the spiracular muscle 59) are very charac- 
teristic thoracic muscles. Muscle 44 takes origin from the paratergite and is inserted into 
a line at the anterior edge of the sternopleuron in its upper part. This line is also made use 
of by the two small muscles 46 and 47. Muscle 45 arises from the limpet-shaped sclerite 
which has been here termed the basalar, though this designation requires confirmation. 
It is a striking fan-shaped muscle inserted into the top of the mes-epimeron just anterior to 
the subalar sclerite at a point below which muscle 50 is inserted. This is at the base of the 
hamular process of Prashad (posterior portion of the pleural process of Snodgrass). 
Note 3. The tracing of the insertion of muscles into the basal sclerites of the wing root 
(axillary muscles) is difficult. But there appear to be three muscles so inserted, namely 
47, 48 and 49. Muscle 47 is very small and seems to be inserted into the dens (second 
axillary). Three muscles are stated by Prashad to be so inserted, one into the dens, one 
into the unguiculus and one into the remigium. Apart from 47 the only other muscles so 
far observed by me have been the flexor muscles 48 and 49 inserted into or near the 
posterior root. Muscle 48 is much the largest direct wing muscle. It arises from nearly the 
whole of the surface of the mes-epimeron and terminates in a tendon that passes behind the 
subalar sclerite to be inserted into a thickening on the membrane at the posterior base of 
the wing near the point of junction of the axillary cord. It is clearly the flexor of the wing. 
Muscle 49 which arises from the posterior border of the sternopleuron appears to join 48 
in a common tendon. Still another muscle, 50, rises from the posterior edge of the sterno- 
pleuron and is inserted into the mes-epimeron at the base of the hamular process, and a third 
muscle so arising, 51, is inserted into the long rod-like apodeme lying just internal to the 
mes-epimeron. Muscles 52 and 53 arise from an apodematous extension where the upper 
portion of the second coxa lies between the sternopleuron and the meron. In the table 
this extension has been termed the furco-pleural line. Both muscles are inserted in the 
region of the wing root. 
Note 4. The muscle here termed furco-entopleural is named after a term used by Maki 
which appears to be applicable. It arises from the cup-shaped process of the mesofurca 
and passes outwards to the furco-pleural line. It is included among the wing muscles 
though its action is not very clear. 
Note 5. The muscles of the halteres appear to be only two, namely a very small fan-shaped 
muscle inserted into the anterior portion of the base of the haltere and arising from the 
metathorax just anterior to the haltere and which may be an elevator of the organ, and a 
larger, longer and more conspicuous muscle, 56, arising from the posterior edge of the 
mesepimeron in its lower part which would appear to be a depressor muscle. 
Note 6. The spiracular muscles are indicated in Fig. 68 (2). Muscle 59 is much the 
largest and is assumed to be a dilator muscle of the mesothoracic spiracle as its action 
would seem to be of this nature. It is a conspicuous fan-shaped muscle arising from the 
592 
MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
post-spiracular sclerite. The closing muscle for the mesothoracic spiracle is 58, situated 
ventral to the spiracle. For the metathoracic spiracle there is a small fan-shaped muscle, 
no. 60, arising from the posterior border of the mes-epimeron and inserted into the lower 
end of the spiracular opening. 
Note 7. In the mosquito the coxae form a fixed and integral part of the thorax. Hence 
muscles concerned with movements of the legs are for the most part inserted into the 
more moveable trochanter. For each leg there is one large muscle (pleura-trochanteral) 
which arises from an extensive area on the respective pleura. These pass through the coxae 
as long tendons to be inserted into triangular, bifid or heart-shaped small patella-like 
sclerites from which in turn a ligament extends to that part of the trochanter that is 
situated opposite to the femur attachment. Hence action of the muscle is to straighten out 
the femur and leg, a movement here given as extension (covering the terms suitable to some 
cases of depressor or promotor). In each leg, joining the tendon as it enters the coxa, there 
is a muscle arising from the corresponding sternal complex (furca) and given in the table 
as furco-trochanteral. The common tendon may be termed the extensor tendon. 
The extensor tendon also receives fibres arising from the walls of the coxa. These tend 
to form a series of separate fibres which on reaching the tendon are inserted into it almost 
at right angles. For some reason these separate fibres in preparations very commonly 
show a wavy or curled character which serves to distinguish them. The muscle formed by 
them is given in the table as the extensor tendon adjustor. Another muscle of coxal origin 
entering the tendon has been termed the accessory extensor. In the coxa of the first leg this 
is a small distinct compact muscle arising from the antero-internal border of the coxa close 
to the small hairy node in this situation. It passes down the coxa and joins the extensor 
common tendon. Fibres in a somewhat similar position occur in the other coxae, but it is 
difficult to say whether they represent a separate muscle or form a part of the loose-fibred 
muscle, the adjustor. For the two hinder coxae therefore the numbers for this muscle have 
been given in brackets. 
Theflexor (remotor or elevator) muscles working through the trochanters arise from the 
coxae. These arise from the external aspects of the coxae and are inserted into the tro- 
chanter on the same side as the femur attachment by a simple tendon. Towards the apex 
of each coxa, but particularly large in the mid coxa where it occupies the inner bulge, is a 
fan-shaped arrangement of fibres which I have termed in the table the apical muscle. 
In addition to the above each coxa receives anteriorly and posteriorly the insertion of a 
more or less sheet-like muscle arising from the apodematous median ridge of the sterna 
and inserted into the corresponding proximal margins of the coxae. The anterior muscles 
arise from the sterna proper (basi-sterna), the posterior from the furcal ridge. These sheet- 
like muscles, though largely transverse in direction, are to be distinguished from the true 
transverse muscles which cross the median line. In the table they are entered as sterno- 
coxal. Some idea of their character will be obtained from Fig. 69 (2). 
A point that should be mentioned in respect to the leg musculature as here given is that, 
though the large extensor muscle for the first pair of legs has, in accordance with those for 
the other legs, been given as pleuro-trochanteral, there is in this case some doubt since the 
part from which it takes origin has been now generally known as the posterior pronotum. 
It is possible, on the other hand, that the posterior pronotum as now named is not pronotal 
in nature but a pleural sclerite, the pro-epimeron, as originally designated by Snodgrass 
(1912) and others (Christophers, 1915; Prashad, 1918). 
38 593 CH 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
Note 8. The protomorphic system of the thorax occurs as two layers of muscular 
strands, one dorsal and one ventral to the alimentary canal with some contributory muscles 
from the head, neck and thorax. On reaching the posterior end of the thorax these strands 
become continuous respectively with the dorsal and ventral abdominal muscles. 
The dorsal series of each side commence anteriorly with the muscles as given in the table 
and Fig. 69 (9). These meet forming a knot-like plexus about the large tracheae entering 
the thorax from the spiracles. At the level of the dorsal diverticula there appears to be a 
small transverse muscle. From the knot the strands pass back beneath the longitudinal 
indirect wing muscles and above the narrow part of the mid-gut to join the dorsal system 
of the abdomen. 
The ventral series commences anteriorly on each side with the tentorial muscle from the 
head. These pass to the ends of the small prothoracic ventral transverse muscle. Re- 
inforced by a branch from the dorsal knot, the tract passes backwards beneath the ventral 
diverticulum and above the ventral nerve chain to join the ventral series of the abdomen. 
There is a second ventral transverse muscle situated a little anterior to the mesofurca. 
The impression given by the system is that it has little relation to bodily movements, but 
may have visceral and perhaps tracheal functions. 
1 
2 
3 
8 
9 
10 Figure 69. Muscles of the thorax and abdomen. 
Middle coxa and mesofurca to show muscles. 
Horizontal section through the neck and thorax showing muscles. a, prothoracic furca; 
b, mesothoracic furca. On the left the cup-shaped process is shown. On the right the stem 
of same is shown as though cut across at a lower level; c, metathoracic furca. 
Showing muscles of the protomorphic system in region of the prothorax. The tracheal vessel 
passing forwards and dividing into two (common cephalic) has been shown as though cut 
away. 
Showing muscles at the trochantero-femoral joint. 
The same at the femoro-tibia1 joint. a, spiny strap-like thickening into which the tendon of 
the extensor muscle is inserted; b, sclerotised area on ventral aspect of head of tibia. 
The same at the tibio-tarsal joint. 
Showing dorsal muscles of abdominal segment of the newly emerged imago. The numbers 
give the identification of the muscles with Samtleben’s numbers for the larval muscles of the 
series (dorsal longitudinal). a, nos. 2-4 of the lateral dorso-ventral of Samtleben; b, no. 5 
of the same. 
The median dorso-ventrals are indicated only in Fig. 8. 
The same for the ventral longitudinal series. a, nos. 2 and 3 of the dorso-ventral series. 
Showing course of the ventral tracts of the protomorphic series of the thorax and their 
continuation as the ventral longitudinal series of the abdomen. a, prothoracic muscular knot 
and ventral transverse muscle; b, cup-shaped process of mesofurca; c, muscular strands 
lying median to the main strands. 
Tangential section through portion of the pleura and adjacent tergite showing thread-like 
muscle fibres in the former. a, portion of section through the pleural membrane; b, portion 
through the tergite showing absence of fibres. 
Lettering : csc, cervical sclerite ; Dd, dorsal diverticulum ; Dv, ventral diverticulum ; ht, heart ; 
Mg, mid-gut (anterior portion) ; Oe, oesophagus; Sp, mesothoracic spiracle. 
The numbers (except those in Figs. 7 and 8) indicate muscles as tabulated in the text. 
The numbers (large) in Figs. 7 and 8 are Samtleben’s numbers for the abdominal muscles in the 
larva. 
594 
, 02mm. , 
. 01 mm. 
a’ ’ 8 @2 mm. @2 mm. 
7 
IO 
, 0+2mm. , 
Figure 69 
595 38-2 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
MUSCLES OF THE LEGS (Fig.69) 
Following upon the muscles moving the trochanter on the coxa in each leg are those con- 
cerned with movement of the femur on the trochanter, the tibia on the femur and the first 
tarsal joint on the tibia. In addition there is a long tendon passing through the tibia and 
tarsal segments to the ungues. 
The trochantero-femoral muscle (99) rises from the walls of the trochanter and con- 
verges to be inserted into the proximal surface of the strongly sclerotised spur-like processes 
which project from the proximal end of the femur into the trochanter (Fig. 69 (4)). The 
femoro-tibia1 muscles arise from the upper end of the femur and along the femoral shaft 
and consist respectively of an extensor (100) and a flexor of the tibia (101). The extensor 
muscle is inserted into a strap-like sclerite with fine spines that passes to the dorsal edge of 
the proximal end of the tibia (Fig. 69 (5)). The flexor muscle is inserted by a short tendon 
on to the ventral edge of the same. Between the two muscles and forming a partition along 
the length of the femoral cavity is a delicate membrane carrying the tracheal branch to the 
limb. Similarly arising from the walls of the tibia in its distal portion are the extensor (102) 
and flexor (103) of the first tarsal segment. In addition, especially noticeable in the hind 
leg, are some fibres at right-angles to the tendon of the extensor muscle (the ventral of the 
two muscles) that call to mind the adjustor muscles in the coxae and which may have a 
similar function (104). 
According to Snodgrass (1935) the long tendon to the ungues arises in insects from 
muscles in the femur and tibia and is inserted into the basal plate of the ungues (ungue- 
tractor plate). 
MUSCLES OF THE ABDOMEN 
With the exception of some points mentioned later the abdominal musculature of the imago 
is identical with that of the larva. For this and other reasons given later a full account 
segment by segment as given for the larva seems uncalled for. It consists as in the larva of 
longitudinal and dorso-ventral segmental muscular bands. The longitudinal bands are 
arranged in a dorsal and a ventral series. How close the resemblance of these series to 
those of the larva will be clear from Fig. 69 (7), (8), which give camera Zucida drawings of 
the two series in the imago, the muscles numbered according to Samtleben’s system of 
nomenclature for the larva (see ch. XIII, p. 311). In the dorso-ventral series there are, as in 
the larva, in the normal segment four laterally situated muscles (Zdv. 2-5), three about the 
middle of the segment (Zdv. 2-4) and one at its posterior end (Zdv. 5). There are also bands 
passing dorso-ventrally at the intersegmental line (median dorso-ventral, mdv. l-3) of 
Samtleben. 
All these muscles have the characters of the larval series; that is, in preparations they 
stain less markedly; do not stand out so vididly under polarised light as do the wing and 
leg muscles; consist of single fibres with sarcolemma, never bundles of tubular fibres as 
with most of the leg muscles and are much less vividly striared than these. Very charac- 
teristically too they pass from intersegmental line to intersegmental line and moreover are 
continuous in series with the protomorphic strands of the thorax, the dorsal longitudinal 
strands of the thorax continuing as the dorsal longitudinal series of the abdomen and the 
ventral strands as the ventral abdominal series. 
What has been said applies to the system as seen in the newly emerged or young mosquito 
596 
MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
shortly after emergence. In mosquitoes several days old there is a general deterioration of 
the muscles. In an unfed mosquito 48 hours from emergence the bands can still largely 
be made out but are more attenuated and seem degenerated. In still older mosquitoes 
practically the only muscles showing up under polarised light are two thin thread-like 
fibres in each segment as described below. Hocking (1952) has described autolysis of the 
flight muscles of a Canadian mosquito as a means of prolonging life. If the above obser- 
vations are confirmed, it would appear that in Acdes aegypti the abdominal muscles, after 
being passed on from the larva and pupa, are in the imago made use of in a somewhat 
similar way during the few days in which the mosquito following upon emergence does not 
feed. Following upon emergence it has already been noted that there is a reduction in 
weight and in the size of the abdomen. It is possible that the using up of the muscles plays 
some part in this. 
A feature very characteristic of the musculature of the imago is the presence in the first 
abdominal segment on each side of a long band of muscle passing from the metathoracic 
knot to beyond the second segment and ending in diffusely splayed out branches. Between 
these are the two thin muscles referred to above, similar muscles being repeated in the 
subsequent segments (Fig. 69 (9)). Another feature is the presence just beneath the soft 
pleural membrane of rows of fine muscular fibres arranged dorso-ventrally. Very similar 
fibres may be present extending from the ends of the lateral dorso-ventral muscles, but 
those referred to seem quite distinct from such. They arise and terminate entirely in the 
subcuticular tissue of the pleural membrane and are particularly conspicuous in the 
recently fed mosquito where the membrane is stretched and the fibres correspondingly long 
(Fig. 69 (10)). 
No extrinsic muscles have been noted in connection with the abdominal spiracles. The 
alar-y muscles are described when dealing with the circulatory system and those of the 
terminal segments and hypopygium under the generative system. 
REFERENCES 
(a) THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 
APOSTOLIDON, N. X. (1901). Anophelon konopon. Athens. (Copy in the Shipley Collection, 
Molten0 Institute, Cambridge.) 
BARRAUD, P. J. and COVELL, G. (1928). The morphology of the buccal cavity in Anopheline and 
Culicine mosquitoes. Ind. J. Med. Res. 15, 671-9. 
BEYER, G. E., POTHIER, 0. L., COURET, M. and LEMANN, J. J. (1902). Bionomics, experimental 
investigations with Bacillus sanarelli and experimental investigations with malaria in con- 
nection with mosquitoes of New Orleans. New Orleans Med. Surg. J. 1902, l-78. 
BHATIA, M. L. and WATTAL, B. L. (1957). Description of a hitherto unknown structure in the 
mouthparts of mosquitoes. Ind. J. Malar. 11, 183-9. 
BHATIA, M. L., WATTAL, B. L. and KALRA, N. L. (1957). Structure of salivary glands in mosquitoes. 
A preliminary note. Ind. J. Malar. 11, 55-9. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). The anatomy and histology of the adult female mosquito. Rep. 
Malar. Comm. R. Sot. (4), l-20. 
CORNWALL, J. W. (1923). On the structure of the salivary pump in certain blood-sucking and 
other insects. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 996-1007. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1930a). Contribution a l’etude de la biologie et de l’histophysiologie de CuZex 
pipiens. Arch. ZooZ. Exp. Geiz. 70, 281-431. 
597 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (193Ob). Sur l’histologie et l’histophysiologie de l’intestine de Culex pipiens 
(imago) et en particulier sur la digestion du sang. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 103, 568-70. 
DUFOUR, L. (185 1). Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques sur les Dip&es. Mein. Acad. 
Sci., Paris, 11, 171-360. 
ENGEL, E. 0. (1924). Das Rectum der Dipteren in morphologischer und histologischer Hinsicht. 
Z. wiss. Zool. 122, 503-33. 
EYSELL, A. (1905). Die Stechmticken. In Mense’s Handb. Tropenkrankh. 2, 44-94. Barth, 
Leipzig (and subsequent editions). 
GOLDI, A. (1913). Die sanitlirisch-pathologische Bedeutung der Insekten und verwandter Glieder- 
tiere. Berlin. (Culicidae, pp. 31-53.) 
GRANDPRB, A. D. DE and CHARMOY, D. D’E. DE (1900). Les moustiques. Anatomie et biologic. 
Port Louis, Mauritius. 
GRASSI, B. (1901). Studi di uno zoologo sulla malaria. Ed. 2. Rome. 
HOCKING, B. (1953). The intrinsic range and speed of flight of insects. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 
104, 223-345. 
HOLT, C. M. (1917). Multiple complexes in the alimentary tract of Culex pipiens. .I. Morph. 29, 
607-17. 
HURST, C. H. (1890a). On the life history and development of a gnat (Culex). Guardian Press, 
Manchester. 
HURST, C. H. (1890 6). The PupaZ Stage of Culex. Guardian Press, Manchester. 
JENSEN, D. V. (1953). The morphological and postembryonic development of the salivary glands 
of Anopheles albimanus Wiedemann (Diptera: Culicidae). M.S. Thesis. George Washington 
University. 56 pp. 
JENSEN, D. V. and JONES, J. C. (1956). A note on some variations in the structure of the salivary 
glands of Anopheles albimanus Wied. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer., 50, 464-9. 
JOBLING, B. (1928). The structure of the head and mouthparts in Culicoides pulicaris L. (Diptera: 
Nematocera). Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 211-36. 
LEON, N. (1923). Ueber die Speichenpumpe der Culiciden. Zbl. Bakt. (Abt. I, Orig.) 90, 
361-2. 
LEON, N. (1924). Contributions a l’e’tude deparasites animaux de Roumanie 1898-1924. Bucharest. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1887). Poison fangs and glands of the mosquito. Science, 10, 106-7. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1888). The poison apparatus of the mosquito. Amer. Nat. 22, 884-8. 
MACLOSKIE, G. (1898). (Edit.) Brit. Med. J. 2, 901-3. 
MARSHALL, J. F. (1938). The British Mosquitoes. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), London. 
MARTINI, E. (1920). Uber Stechmticken besonders deren europaische Arten und ihre Bekampfung. 
Arch. Sch@s.- u. Tropenhyg. 24, Beih. 1, l-267. 
NEUMANN, R. 0. and MAYER, M. (1914). Atlas und Lehrbuch wichtiger tierischer Parasiten und 
ihrer Ubertrager. In Lehmann’s Mediz. Atlanten. Vol. XI. Mtinchen. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1903). Studies in relation to malaria. The structure and 
biology of Anopheles. J. Hyg., Camb., 3, 166-215. 
PERFILIEV, P. P. (1930). Zur Frage iiber die vergleichende Anatomie von Anopheles. Mag. 
Parasit., Leningrad, 1, 75-96. Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 19, 230. 
POUCHET, F. (1847). Sur l’apparat digestif du Cousin (Culex pipiens Linn.). C. R. Acad. Sci., 
Paris, 25, 589-9 1. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1943). On the histological structure of the midgut of mosquitoes. J. Malar. 
Inst. India, 5, 247-50. 
RICHINS, C. A. (1938). The metamorphosis of the digestive tract of Aedes dorsalis Meigen. 
Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 31, 74-83. 
ROBINSON, G. G. (1939). The mouthparts and their function in the female mosquito Anopheles 
maculipennis. Parasitology, 31, 2 12-42. 
SHUTE, P. G. (1940). Supernumerary and bifurcated acini of the salivary glands of Anopheles 
maculipennis. Riv. d. Malarial. 19, Sez. 1, 16-19. 
SINTON, J. A. and COVELL, G. (1927). The relation of the morphology of the buccal cavity to the 
classification of Anopheline mosquitoes. Ind. J. Med. Res. 15, 301-8. 
598 
REFERENCES 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). The Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York and London. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1943). The feeding apparatus of biting and sucking insects affecting man and 
animals. Smithson. Misc. CoZZ. 104, no. 1, 1-15 1. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1944). The feeding apparatus of biting and sucking insects affecting man and 
animals. Smithson. Misc. CoZZ. 104, no. 7, 37-50. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1953). The metamorphosis of a fly’s head. Smithson. Misc. CoZZ. 122, no. 3, 
l-25. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. H&t. 32, 
145-202. 
TREMBLEY, H. L. (1951). Pyloric spines in mosquitoes. J. Nat. Malar. Sot. 10, 213-15. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2 (and subsequent 
editions). Methuen and Co., London. 
YAGUZHINSKAYA, L. W. (1940). Presence d’une membrane peritrophique dans l’estomac de la 
femelle adulte d’AnopheZes maculipennis. Mag. Parasit., Leningrad, 9, 601-3. 
(b) THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM 
ANNETT, H. E., DUTTON, J. E. and ELLIOTT, J. H. (1901). Report of the malaria expedition to 
Nigeria. Part II. LpooZ Sch. Trop. Med. Mem. 4, 73-89. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1915). Pilotaxy of Anopheles. Znd. J. Med. Res. 3, 362-70. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1881). Anatomy of the Mouthparts and of the Sucking Apparatus of some Diptera. 
Boston. 
DIMMOCK, G. (1883). Anatomy of the mouthparts and suctorial apparatus of Culex. Psyche, 3, 
231-41. 
DIRKES, L. (1928). Das larval Muskelsystem und die Entwicklung der imaginal Flugmuskulatur 
von Psychoda. Z. Morph. OkoZ. Tiere, 11, 182-228. 
HOCKING, B. (1952). Autolysis of flight muscles in a mosquito. Nature, Lond., 169, 1101. 
JOBLING, B. (1928). See under section (a). 
KULAGIN, N. (1905). Der Kopfbau bei CuZex und Anopheles. 2. wiss. ZooZ. 83,285-335. 
MAKI, T. (1938). Studies of the thoracic musculature of insects. Mem. Fat. Sci. Agric. Taihoku 
Imp. Univ. 24, no. 1, Entom. no. 10. 
MORISON, G. D. (1927-29). The muscles of the adult honey-bee (Apis mellifera L.). Quart. J. 
Micr. Sci. 71, 395-463, 527-651, 72, 51 l-26. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1901, 1903). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., 
Camb., 1, 458-80; 3, 166-215. 
PRASHAD, B. (1918). The thorax and wing of the mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 5, 610-40. 
ROBINSON, G. G. (1939). See under section (a). 
SAMTLEBEN, B. (1929). Anatomie und Histologie der Abdominal- und Thoraxmuskulatur von 
Stechmtickenlarven. 2. wiss. ZooZ. 134, 179-269. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1912). The thorax (Psorophora ciliata). In Howard, Dyar and Knab, 1, 55-9. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1927). Morphology and mechanism of the insect thorax. Smithson. Misc. 
CoZZ. 80, no. 1. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). See under section (a). 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). See under section (a). 
599 
XXVII 
THE IMAGO: 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE (cont.) 
(c) THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
LITERATURE AND TECHNIQUE 
A general account of the tracheal system is given by Snodgrass (1935) and a good short 
summary by Imms (1938) and by Weber (1938). See also especially Landa (1948) who 
gives a nomenclature based on the tracheal system of the ephemerid larva; Lehmann 
(1926) on the tracheal system and its development in the grasshopper with general remarks 
on homology; Kennedy (1922) on homology of the system in insects ; Ripper (193 1) on 
homology in arthropods. 
The majority of descriptions of the tracheal system in Nematocera relate to the larva. 
Among authors who have described the system in the imago in Nematocera, or referred to 
this in describing that of the larva or pupa, are : Taylor (1902), Simulium (larva and imago) ; 
Bodenheimer (1923), Tipula (larva); Feuerborn (1927), Psychoda (larva). There does not 
appear to be any adequate description in the literature of the tracheal system of the 
imaginal mosquito. Recently a study of the tracheal system of a number of species of 
Diptera, including the mosquito, has been made by Miss J. Thomas using the injection 
technique of Wigglesworth referred to later, but at the time of writing these results have 
not been published. The early figure given by me (Christophers, 1901), whilst indicating 
the general arrangement of the system, is incorrect in several respects and the description of 
the system by Nuttall and Shipley (1901) is not very detailed. In this connection it may be 
noted that the paper by Pouchet (1872) entitled ‘Developpement du systeme tracheen de 
1’Anophele’ relates not to Anopheles, but to Chironomus. 
Many attempts have been made to arrive at a satisfactory method of injecting the tracheal 
system. Recently a technique has been described by Wigglesworth (1950,1953, 1954) which 
gives very remarkable results, enabling even the finer branches and tracheoles to be dis- 
played. The following is a brief description. For fuller details the author’s papers should 
be consulted. 
The insect to be injected is placed alive in a small test tube with a hole drilled in the 
bottom (or alternatively closed with fine metal gauze) and the tube arranged in an outer 
receptacle in such a way that, when air has been drawn out of the receptacle, the tube can 
be pushed down, the insect submerged in the injection fluid and air then readmitted. This is 
done by means of a thin glass rod set in the cork of the tube and through a hole in the cork 
of the outer receptacle. To enable the rod to be easily manipulated it should be wetted 
with glycerol. There must be a slit or other opening in the cork of the tube to allow free 
communication between it and the outer vessel. As described by the author the vacuum- 
ising tube from the receptacle leads to a three-way tap by which connection can be made 
with a vacuum pump and manometer, or alternatively with a supply of hydrogen in a 
600 
TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
bladder or to the outside air. Only very moderate negative pressure, however, is necessary 
and this can if desired be easily obtained from mouth suction. It is uncertain too whether 
the use of hydrogen is necessary or adds to the effectiveness. Good results have been 
obtained with Ai;des aegypti using a negative pressure of 60-70 mm. Hg kept up for 
10 minutes or more. This was not found to cause bubbling of the preparation used for 
injection (see below). But a negative pressure as low as 10-15 mm. Hg can be used, this 
being the pressure originally mentioned by the author. Newly emerged insects are to be 
preferred, especially if these can be obtained before pigmentation sets in, for example 
white pupae. Curiously enough A. aegypti appears to stand even greater air deprivation 
than that noted without very marked effect beyond some restlessness. 
The injection medium consists of cobalt naphthenate, a tar-like substance, made up with 
one or two times its own volume of white spirit (a light petrol used by painters). After 
a brief stay in the injection fluid and readmission of air the insect is quickly rinsed in 
several changes of white spirit and transferred to white spirit saturated with H,S through 
which H2S is bubbled. The insect is then fixed in Carnoy and may be sectioned or mounted 
whole or in desired portions or slices. Exposure to H,S can alternately be very con- 
veniently made by the following procedure. To a tube half filled with white spirit add a 
few millilitres of ammonium sulphide solution. This sinks below the spirit and does not 
mix with it. Pipette in a few drops of acetic acid. This causes evolution of H$ with which 
on shaking the tube the white spirit becomes saturated. The injected insect remains in the 
white spirit and does not sink into, or even make contact with, the ammonium sulphide 
solution. Alternatively the insect can be placed on wet filter paper on the cork of the tube. 
A few minutes’ exposure seems all that is necessary. To minimise the time exposed to 
white spirit the insect can be transferred, directly after rinsing, to Carnoy that has been 
treated by the addition of a few drops of ammonium sulphide solution. All these methods 
give blackening of the tracheal vessels. 
For whole mounted specimens the effect is greatly enhanced by bleaching. The method 
recommended by Wigglesworth in his first paper to avoid the effect of diaphanol or 
hydrogen peroxide upon the injection material is, before bleaching, to soak well first in 
saturated potassium ferricyanide. Care should be taken that no steel instruments or 
needles should come in contact with the specimen at any stage. In place of canada 
balsam and xylol, specimens, after bleaching and dehydration, may be cleared in tetralin 
and mounted in DPT medium [distren_e 80 (10 g.) dissolved in tetralin (40 ml.) with the 
addition of tricresyl phosphate (7.5 ml.)] ( see Giglioli, 1953; also Baker, 1945, p. 178). 
Various alternative methods of treating the injected insects are given by Wigglesworth in 
the papers noted regarding which the author should be consulted in original. 
GENERAL REMARKS ON THE IMAGINAL SYSTEM 
The tracheal system in the imago conforms in essence to the general plan as seen in the 
larva. It has, however, been profoundly modified to meet altered conditions, namely 
(1) the complete change in the site of entry of air to the system, (2) the vastly greater air 
supply needed for the now existing massive muscles of the wings and legs, necessitating 
new and enlarged tracheal vessels especially in the thorax. 
The large terminal spiracles of the larva have disappeared and the main entry of air 
is now via the mesothoracic and metathoracic spiracles. In the abdomen, in place of the 
601 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
puncta and spiracular cords of the larva and pupa, there are now open spiracles with open 
spiracular tracheae on abdominal segments II-VII. The absence of spiracles on segment I 
has been noted by Nuttall and Shipley (1901). Remarkably, the pupa has large functional 
spiracles in this situation as described by Hurst in 1890. But in the imago nothing remains 
to indicate their presence. Normally too in insects the last pair of spiracles are those on 
the eighth segment. Even in Diptera there is a pair in the larva posterior to those on 
segment VII which it is arguable are those of segment VIII. In the imago of Diptera, 
however, the last pair, as in the mosquito, is on segment VII, suggesting that the absence 
of spiracles on segment VIII is due to their precocious development in the larva (see 
also later reference to the tracheal supply of segment VIII in which there is a sug- 
gestive indication of obliterated spiracles on this segment). 
The tracheal vessels of the system have also undergone considerable changes. The great 
tracheal trunks that in the larva play such a dominant role are still recognisable, but no 
longer dominant. In the thorax they are still the largest tracheae, but now, except in their 
extreme posterior part, they are rigid tubes approximately circular in section, unlike the 
widely dilated trunks of the larva. Furthermore, they have become subordinated in 
function to numbers of newly developed large tracheae. As a result of these new tracheae 
being of large size, with much ballooning of the parts where they take origin from the 
spiracular atrium, the original relation of the trunks to the spiracles as represented by the 
puncta and connecting cords is obscured, the trunks appearing to open directly into the 
dilated atria1 cavity. 
Still greater changes have taken place in these trunks in the abdomen. Except for a 
narrow connecting passage in abdominal segment I there is now no functional connection 
of the trunks with the tracheal knots which in the larva were situated at their external 
borders and opened out from them. The trunks in the imago have lost all resemblance to 
their original character and if, in the older mosquito, not removed altogether are repre- 
sented by tissue in process of active removal. With these changes the abdominal tracheal 
system has become quite independent of the trunks with some interesting consequences 
referred to later. 
THE SPIRACLES (Figs.70-2) 
In the imago the spiracles are two pairs in the thorax, an anterior (mesothoracic) and a 
posterior (metathoracic) pair, and a pair on each of the abdominal segments II-VII. Their 
structure has been described by Hassan (1944) in AnopheZes macuhpennis and in Theobaldia 
annulata; see also Alessandrini and Missiroli (1926). Both thoracic and abdominal spiracles 
in Aedes aegypti conform closely to Hassan’s description. 
The mesothoracic spiracles are situated on each side in a depressed triangular area of 
membrane close beneath the lateral edge of the scutum and between the posterior pro- 
notum and the post-spiracular sclerite (Fig. 72 (3-5)). The opening, atrial opening (ato), is 
elongate-oval, or more slit-like, depending upon the extent to which the spiracle is open or 
closed. It is aligned obliquely, its dorsal end being posterior. On each side of the opening 
is a hairy bar-like thickening, peritremes (of Snodgrass), peritremal sclerites (of Hassan), 
the anterior a little shorter than the posterior. When the opening is narrow the peritremes 
lie approximately parallel, but with the opening widened they diverge correspondingly at 
their upper ends. Seen in section they have a certain depth and, as their inner surfaces are 
covered with small hairs, some approach to a hair-lined outer chamber of the spiracle is 
made (Fig. 72 (7)). At the bottom of this inner surface there arise thin, almost valve-like, 
602 
Figure 70. Tracheal system of head and thorax. 
1 Lateral view of tracheation of head showing numbered branches of dorsal cephalic (Ms. 2) 
and ventral cephalic (Ms. 3). The numbers are those given in the text for the branches of the 
tracheae respectively but without their full notation, for example the figure 2 when shown as 
a branch of Ms. 2 would in full notation be Ms. 2. 2 and 3 would be Ms. 2. 3. Similarly if 
shown as a branch of Ms. 3 the figure 2 would indicate Ms. 3. 2. a, base of antenna1 flagellum 
showing a trachea-like blood vessel from the antenna1 pulsatile organ. 
2 Dorsal view of tracheation of head showing on the left side the dorsal cephalic and on the 
right the ventral cephalic. The branches indicated as in the first figure. a, position of ten- 
torium in relation to the ventral cephalic. The tentorium is dorsal to the trachea; b, position 
of anterior end of tentorium; c, outline of pedicel; d, position of frons. The organ of Clements 
is shown by a small circle. 
3 Lateral view of tracheation of the thorax. The numbers are as given in the text for MS and Mt 
branches. a-a, line of tergo-pleural suture; b-b, dotted line indicating lower limit of the 
longitudinal indirect wing muscle bundles; c-c, dotted lines indicating position of the mid- 
gut; d-d, dotted lines indicating position of the ventral nerve cord ganglia. 
603 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
clear expansions forming the actual edges of the opening, spiracular lids of Hassan (li) ; 
being more developed ventrally they form a calliper-like border to the atria1 opening. The 
atria1 opening is closed by a single small muscle at the ventral end of the opening (muscle 
no. 58) as previously described. It was at first thought from appearances in sections that 
there was also a muscle arising from the tergite at the dorsal end of the spiracle (originally 
entered as muscle 57, but later omitted from the list). This seems to be merely some 
thickening with fibrous structure in the membrane in this region. A muscle which from its 
position may have some effect in enlarging the opening, however, is muscle 59 arising from 
a large part of the inner aspect of the post-spiracular sclerite. Its contraction by dragging 
on the sclerite would seem likely to enlarge the opening, even if it had other functions to 
perform as a pleural indirect wing muscle. 
1 02mm. 1 L,I’“\’ 3 
Figure 71. Tracheal system of the abdomen. 
Showing tracheation of the abdomen. The figures indicate the tracheae as listed in the text, 
namely (1) spiracular (not numbered) ; (2) connective; (3) ventral ; (4) dorsal; (5) accessory 
ventral (not figured but arising, when present, from the connective opposite to the dorsal 
trachea); (6) visceral; (7’) posterior visceral to ovary; (7”) the same to rectum. a, branch 
from trachea of hind leg into first abdominal segment. 
Showing tracheation of segments VII and VIII; lateral view left side. a, appearance suggesting 
tracheal knot in segment VIII; b, connective of segment VIII giving off ventral branch; 
c, visceral branch of segment VIII; d, posterior visceral of segment VIII. 
The same, dorsal view. Lettering as for 2. 
Lettering : sp. 3, spiracle of segment III; sp. 7, spiracle of segment VII; spm, spermathecae. 
604 
TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
The atria1 opening passes into a shallow cavity of somewhat greater extent than the 
spiracle as marked by the peritremes (Fig. 72 (7)). Into this cavity open a number of large 
tracheae. Certain of these (tracheae nos. Ms. 5, 6, 8 and 9) open superficially into the sides 
of the cavity, but the thoracic trunks, the common cephalics and the large tracheal branches 
supplying the muscles in the dorsal portion of the thorax enter deeply into its base. The 
walls of the cavity are to a certain extent free from taenidia so that it may be regarded as 
the atrium, though greatly encroached upon by the massive tracheae opening into it. The 
spiracle in this case would appear to fall into the class of atria1 spiracle with lips and peri- 
tremes as figured by Snodgrass (1935) in his Fig. 230 B, the lips and peritremes being more or 
less flush with the surface and the atrium with no closing apparatus at the entrance of the 
trachea. 
The metathoracic spiracle is situated behind the upper part of the mes-epimeron a little 
anterior and ventral to the base of the haltere and on the rather flat and partially mem- 
branous metapleuron. It is of very similar construction to the mesothoracic spiracle, but 
the hair-bearing peritreme thickenings form a complete ring enclosing the narrowly oval 
atria1 opening, and the lids are less conspicuous. As in the mesothoracic spiracle the atria1 
opening passes directly into a shallow cavity representing the atrium, but of which the 
walls are largely formed by the entering tracheae. There is one small muscle arising from 
the lower part of the mes-epimeron and inserted into the ventral end of the spiracular 
opening which acts as a closing muscle. As with the mesothoracic spiracle there is no 
closing apparatus at the entrance of the tracheae into the atrium. 
The abdominal spiracles (Fig. 72 (9-l 1)). These are situated in the pleural membrane 
towards the anterior end of their respective segments. They are very similar in all the 
segments in which they occur. Though small compared with the thoracic spiracles they 
have a well-developed closing apparatus at the tracheal entrance to the atrium. At their 
external orifice there is a slight depression of the microtrichae-covered pleural membrane 
and at the bottom of this a circular ‘lip ‘. This bears hairs and has a certain thickness so 
that a small superficial chamber is formed at the bottom of which is a thickened ring leading 
into a small but well-marked atrium (a), the walls of which are free from taenidia and 
thickened. From the atrium a narrow passage leads into the relatively wide spiracular 
trachea. At this point the atria1 wall is specially thickened, forming a boss-like elevation 
(c) from which there extends a strongly sclerotised bar (up). Associated with these struc- 
tures are small, but typically striated, muscular bands enclosed in a capsule that forms a 
projecting bulge externally where atrium meets trachea (Fig. 72 (11)). The spiracular 
trachea is a straight length of trachea with well-marked taenidia which passes from the 
spiracle to the segmental knot where the chief tracheal branches of the segment meet or 
take origin. At this point, which may be termed the segmental tracheal knot, the component 
tracheae commonly form a triple knuckle-like structure which in mounted preparations is 
often more conspicuous than the spiracle and may cause the quite long spiracular trachea 
to be overlooked. 
LIST OF MAIN TRACHEAE (Figs.70,71) 
Below are given the larger tracheae and their main branches. The numbers given to them are 
those by which they are indicated in the figures and by which they can if necessary be 
referred to in the text. They are listed in relation to the spiracles with which they are con- 
nected, those connecting two spiracles being listed under the more anterior spiracle, unless 
605 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
there are reasons to the contrary. Those connected with the mesothoracic spiracle are listed 
as Ms. followed by a number. Those connected with the metathoracic spiracle are listed as 
Mt. and those of the abdomen under the numbered abdominal segment to which the 
spiracle belongs. The dorsal trunks in the thorax are treated as they take their place as 
tracheal vessels. 
Ms. 1. Common cephalic. Takes origin from the spiracle ventrally and just external to the 
thoracic tracheal trunk. After passing forwards to the level of the anterior pronotal lobe each 
common cephalic divides into : 
Ms. 2. Dorsal cephalic. Passes forwards through the neck to enter the head through the 
occipital foramen. At about the middle of its course to the foramen it is linked to its fellow of 
the opposite side by a short commissure, anterior commissure (Ms. 2. 1). For branches in the 
head see under ‘Tracheation of the head’ in a subsequent section. 
Ms. 3. Ventral cephalic. Passes forwards along with Ms. 2 to enter the head through the 
occipital foramen a little ventral and external to this trachea. At about the same level as the 
anterior commissure it gives off the trachea of the$rst leg (Ms. 3. 1). For branches in the head 
see as for the dorsal cephalic. 
Ms. 4. Thoracic trunk. A wide tracheal trunk arising from the lower part of the atrium, 
passing at first ventrally and then horizontally through the thorax below the medianly situated 
longitudinal indirect wing muscles to connect up by a branch with the lower part of the meta- 
l 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
10 
11 Figure 72. Tracheal trunks and spiracles. 
Transverse section of trunks at level of mesofurca. The trunks show as rigid tubes circular in 
section. a, protomorphic muscular strands, dorsal series; b, the same, ventral series; 
c, lower limit of longitudinal indirect wing muscles. 
Transverse section of trunks at entrance to abdomen. Lettering as for 1. 
Mesothoracic spiracle. External view with anterior direction to left. The bar across the 
atria1 opening is the ridge on the floor of the atrium separating the opening into the atrium 
of tracheae Ms. 10 above and Ms. 4 and Ms. 1 (trunk and common cephalic) below. 
a, membrane with dotted line showing limits of atrium beneath; b, closing muscle (muscle 
no. 58). 
Showing relation of mesothoracic spiracle to thoracic sclerites. 
Muscles in region of the mesothoracic spiracle. 
Metathoracic spiracle. External view with anterior direction to left. About half magnifi- 
cation of 3. a, membrane with dotted line showing limits of atrium beneath; b, closing muscle 
(muscle no. 60); c, depressor muscle of haltere (muscle no. 56). 
Horizontal section through mesothoracic spiracle. a, tracheae entering atrium laterally and 
superficially; b, trachea entering floor of atrium. 
Atria1 opening of abdominal spiracle as seen in tangential section just not cutting the 
opening. In the right-hand upper corner is left intact an area of cuticle with its microtrichae. 
Horizontal section through abdominal spiracle. a, depression in pleural membrane leading 
to a circular ‘lip’; b, atrium; c, opening into the spiracular trachea with boss-like thickening; 
d, spiracular trachea. 
Section across abdominal spiracle. 
Closing bar and muscle. 
Lettering: ap, apodeme of closing apparatus; ato, atria1 opening; Dv, ventral diverticulum; 
fp, furca; g, ganglion; ht, heart; Zi, lip of atria1 opening; m, muscle of closing apparatus; Mg, mid- 
gut; ppn, posterior pronotal area; psp, posterior spiracular area (sclerite); ptg, paratergite; 
ptn, portion of postnotum just included in section; ptr, peritreme of atria1 opening; SC, edge of 
scutum; tt, tracheal trunk. 
606 

IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
thoracic spiracular atrium. Continued into the abdomen in a modified form only. For branches 
and characters of the thoracic and abdominal portions see under ‘Tracheation of the thorax’ 
and ‘ Tracheation of the abdomen’. 
Ms. 5. A trachea arising superficially from the ventral portion of the atrium posteriorly to 
Ms. 1 and in common with Ms. 6 and passing into the lower lateral portion of the sternopleuron 
of its side. 
Ms. 6. A trachea arising from a short common portion with Ms. 5, giving off a dorsal branch 
to the area of the wing root and forming with Mt. 2 the mesothoracic-metathoracic connective 
from which is given off: 
Ms. 7. Trachea of the middle leg. 
Ms. 8. A trachea taking origin superficially from the posterior portion of the atrium and 
passing backwards just ventral to the tergo-pleural suture. Gives off branches dorsally and 
ventrally to the anterior dorso-ventral indirect wing muscles of its side. 
Ms. 9. A trachea arising superficially from the dorsal portion of the atrium and passing back- 
wards just dorsal to the tergo-pleural suture and giving off branches to the anterior dorso-ventral 
indirect wing muscles of its side. 
Ms. 10. A short very stout trachea arising dorsally from the deepest part of the atrium and 
after giving off a branch anteriorly (Ms. 10. 1) dividing into: 
Ms. 11. Short wide trachea passing forwards into the 
thorax and branching freely to the muscles in this area. anterior portion of the dorsum of the 
Ms. 12. Similar but larger trachea passing posteriorly and supplying parallel branches among 
the bundles of the longitudinal indirect wing muscles anteriorly and posteriorly, the latter 
extending backwards to come into connection with corresponding branches from Mt. 5 passing 
forwards. 
Mt. 1. Trachea linking up the metathoracic atrium with the thoracic trunk, Ms. 4, and having 
the appearance of the terminal portion of this, the true continuation being flattened and specially 
modified, see under ‘Tracheation of the abdomen’. 
Mt. 2. Trachea arising more superficially from the anterior ventral portion of the atrium, 
giving off branches to the posterior dorso-ventral indirect wing muscle of its side and joining with 
Ms. 6 to form a connective loop from which the trachea of the middle leg takes origin. 
Mt. 3. A stout trachea passing ventrally and 
the coxal and sternal regions of the middle leg. inwards from the ventral portion of the atrium to 
Mt. 4. The trachea of the hind-leg. Takes origin from the posterior 
and passes down behind the mes-epimeron to the hind-leg. ventral portion of the atrium 
Mt. 5. A massive trachea arising from the dorsal portion of the atrium and passing, after 
dividing into two branches, to the region of the scutellum. It gives off numerous branches, 
notably a series of parallel branches passing between the bundles of the longitudinal indirect wing 
muscles and another series passing outwards to the posterior dorso-ventral indirect wing muscle 
bundles of its side. 
I-VIII. 1. * Spiracular trachea. From each abdominal spiracle to tracheal knot. Not in 
segments I or VIII. 
I-VIII. 2. Connective. The designation applies to the connective passing from any given 
segmental knot to that of the segment behind. From it are given off: 
I-VIII. 3. Ventral trachea. Arises from the connective a little distance posterior to the 
knot and passes more or less directly to the ventral region of the segment. 
I-VIII. 4. Dorsal trachea. Arises towards the posterior end of the connective and passes 
dorsally. 
* For description and interpretation of tracheal branches in segments I and VIII see section on ‘Tracheation 
of the abdomen’, p. 612. 
608 
TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
I-VIII. 5. Accessory 
passing ventrally. ventral. A small trachea commonly arising near the dorsal trachea but 
I-VIII. 6. Visceral trachea. Arises from the anterior part of the knot and passes inwards and 
forwards to supply viscera some distance anterior to the segment. 
V-VIII. 7. Posterior visceral. Large branches arising from inner side of knot and passing to 
ovary, testis, or rectum depending on segment. 
TRACHEATION OF THE HEAD (Fig. 70(l),(2)) 
The tracheal supply of the head is derived from the dorsal and ventral cephalic tracheae. 
After giving off respectively the anterior commissural trachea (Ms. 2. 1) and the trachea to 
the first leg (Ms. 3. 1) these enter the head on each side through the occipital foramen 
lying close together, the dorsal cephalic a little dorsal and internal to the ventral cephalic. 
The dorsal cephalic (Ms. 2) immediately after passing through the foramen gives off a 
large branch, the occipital trachea (Ms. 2.2). This passes outwards and upwards in the 
occipital area giving off branches behind the brain and extending to the posterior dorsal 
portion of the compound eye of its side with a branch to the imaginal ocellus. As with many 
of the large tracheae of the head it may show much variability in size and may be locally 
somewhat ballooned. From near its origin there passes directly dorsally a small trachea 
(Ms. 2. 3) which supplies the dorsal dilator muscle of the oesophageal pump. The main 
dorsal cephalic continues forward beneath the brain in the groove between the optic lobe 
externally and, in succession, internally the protocerebrum and the deutocerebrum 
(antenna1 lobe). Shortly after entering the groove it sends a branch upwards into the proto- 
cerebrum (Ms. 2. 4) and after passing some distance forwards one outwards into the optic 
lobe (Ms. 2. 5). Just before leaving the groove it gives off a branch in the region of the 
antenna1 lobe (Ms. 2. 6). At each of these points where the branches enter the brain 
substance there is present a conspicuous large nucleus (tracheal cell) which, embedded 
among the smaller nerve cells of the part, might be mistaken for a larger ganglion cell. 
Similar cells are present at other points where tracheae enter the brain and are useful as 
giving an indication of such entry. 
Where the dorsal cephalic emerges from the groove at the front of the brain it lies just 
external to the broad nerve tract passing from the antenna1 lobe of the brain to Johnston’s 
organ, here termed the antenna1 connective to distinguish it from the nerve to the filament. 
At this point the dorsal cephalic breaks up rather abruptly into branches coming mainly 
from two main divisions of the trunk, a dorsal and a lateral. The dorsal portion sends 
branches which largely supply muscles and other structures in the frontal area and others 
passing backwards over the anterior surface of the brain. It also sends branches into the 
base of the antenna, supplying structures in the pedicel from which twin tracheae pass into 
the flagellum. In the more basal flagellar segments there is, in addition to the two small 
tracheal branches, a conspicuous tube resembling, and which has been mistaken for, 
a trachea, but which is without taenidia and is the antenna1 blood vessel described later 
passing from the pulsatile organ near the base of the antenna into the flagellum of the 
antenna. The lateral branch of the dorsal cephalic continues forwards to enter the clypeus 
at its lateral angles. It largely supplies the muscles in this structure. 
The ventral cephalic is somewhat larger than the dorsal cephalic. After entering the 
occipital foramen it passes on each side over the lateral dilators of the oesophageal pump 
39 609 CH 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
giving off small branches that pass between the muscular bundles. Most usually there are 
two single branches followed by one breaking up into three (Fig. 70 (l), (2)) (Ms. 3. 2-4). 
A little further forwards is a small branch passing to the genal area behind the eye. In its 
forward course the ventral cephalic crosses the tentorium at about one-third of its length 
from its posterior end lying external to this structure and the depressor muscle of the head 
(muscle no. 25). Here a short branch arises externally (Ms. 3. 6) giving branches to the 
lower ocular area. On its inner side passing round the tentorium the trachea gives off the 
large branch that is continued to the proboscis as the labial trachea of its side (Ms. 3. 7). 
What appears as the continuation of the main trachea then passes forwards, outwards and 
dorsally as a short stumpy trachea giving off numerous branches to the central parts of the 
compound eye (Ms. 3’). The labial trachea at its origin gives off a branch on its inner side 
which enters the side of the sub-oesophageal ganglion (Ms. 3. 8), its point of entry being 
marked by the usual tracheal cell. Some distance further on the labial trachea gives off a 
branch on its outer side that continues forward to the genal area of the rostrum (Ms. 3. 9). 
One of its branches passes into the maxillary palps and the other ends in the region of the 
genal shelf and may possibly supply the mandible and maxilla. Some distance beyond the 
origin of Ms. 3.9 the labial branch gives off a trachea to the salivary muscle of its side 
(Ms. 3. 10). From thence the labial trachea runs a conspicuous straight course forward 
and into the proboscis running parallel to the trachea of the opposite side. These two 
parallel large tracheae, which pass through the length of the proboscis in the labial sheath, 
are in great contrast to the tracheal supply to the other mouthparts which have failed to 
show any definite tracheal vessels. 
In general, therefore, the dorsal cephalic provides tracheal supply to the dorsal areas of 
the head, the supra-oesophageal ganglion, the dorsal dilators of the oesophageal pump, the 
scape and pedicel, the frons and clypeus. The ventral cephalic provides tracheation for the 
lateral dilators of the oesophageal pump, the gnathal muscles and gnathal parts of the 
head, the sub-oesophageal ganglion, a large portion of the compound eyes, the salivary 
muscles and the genal, maxillary and labial areas including the proboscis sheath. 
TRACHEATION OF THE THORAX 
The general character of the tracheal supply to the thorax will be clear from Fig. 70 (3) in 
which the position of all the main tracheal branches is shown. Many of the tracheae are 
almost entirely concerned with tracheal supply to the indirect wing muscles which form 
the greater bulk of the contents of the thorax. Thus the large tracheae passing into the 
dorsal portion of the thorax, Ms. 10-12 anteriorly and Mt. 5 posteriorly, are mainly con- 
cerned with sending parallel branches as shown in the figure between the muscular bundles 
of the longitudinal indirect wing muscles which occupy the median portion of the dorsal 
part of the thorax. On each side Ms. 8 and 9 send similar branches between the muscular 
bundles of the dorsal parts of the anterior dorso-ventral, while Ms. 5 supplies the ventral 
portion of this muscle. The trachea Ms. 5 divides into two branches, the more posterior 
passing down the external aspect of the muscle, the more anterior passing inwards and 
ending in branches about the anterior border and inner aspect of the muscle. The posterior 
dorso-ventral indirect wing muscles are supplied on each side by Mt. 5 and Mt. 3, the first 
mentioned supplying the dorsal portion and the latter the ventral. In this case the branches 
from Mt. 5 are directed outwards, not anteriorly as are those supplying the longitudinal 
610 
TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
series, and seen fore-shortened in the figure. Mt. 3 is the middle of the three large tracheae 
passing ventrally from the metathoracic spiracle. It supplies branches to the ventral 
portions of the posterior dorso-ventral indirect wing muscle of its side extending into the 
meron. It also sends branches to the sternal muscles. The tracheal supply to the smaller 
thoracic muscles which are not of the indirect wing muscle type is of a miscellaneous 
character and seemingly relatively less abundant. Branches in the prothorax are largely 
derived from the ventral cephalic (Ms. 3). Those of the rest of the thorax are derived from 
Ms. 5, the thoracic trunk (Ms. 4) and Mt. 3. 
Very conspicuous are the long tracheae to the legs. These pass down the whole length of 
the limb with little or no major branching. Those of the fore-legs take origin from the 
ventral cephalic. Some little distance from their origin they give off a rather large branch 
to the ganglion. They also give a branch almost at their origin to the salivary glands and 
surrounding tissues. The tracheae to the middle legs take origin from the connective loop 
formed by Ms. 6 and Mt. 2. This is in keeping with the generalised condition where the leg 
tracheae take off from the connectives. The tracheae of the hind-legs take origin from the 
posterior part of the atrium of the metathoracic spiracle. Near its origin it gives off a 
small branch that links up with the tracheal system of the abdomen and has a short tubular 
connection with a point on the scalloped edge of the modified abdominal trunk. 
The tracheal supply to the wing in the imago is almost non-existent. In injected material 
I have not found the wing veins injected. In the larva and pupa the tracheal supply to the 
wings is derived from tracheae coming from the anterior portion of the connective loop 
from which the trachea of the mid-leg takes origin (Christophers and Barraud, 1924). In 
the imago a corresponding trachea, namely the upper branch of Ms. 6, can be traced to the 
root of the wing. 
A tracheal vessel of special interest is the large thoracic trunk passing from the meso- 
thoracic spiracle backwards into the metathorax. It does not itself pass to the metathoracic 
spiracle, but is joined to this by a length of trachea (Mt. I), continuing in a modified form 
into the abdomen. Up to close to the junction with Mt. 1 the trunk is a rigid tube, more or 
less circular in section with well-marked taenidia. Just before it is joined by Mt. 1 its inner 
wall becomes partly membranous and beyond the junction only the outer portion has 
resemblance to a trachea and this rapidly becomes smaller and flatter. The inner portion is 
flattened and extended, becoming a flat membranous sheet which, as it passes into the 
abdomen, becomes increasingly difficult to distinguish from the dorsal membrane, if it is 
not actually that structure. Injected material has failed to penetrate this modified portion 
of the trunk. 
The thoracic portion of trunk, after passing some distance ventrally from the meso- 
thoracic atrium, makes a sharp bend and subsequently passes on a more or less level course 
to the metathorax. From each trunk at the bend a small branch passes inwards and then 
upwards passing close to the sides of the aorta and breaking up into branches in the fat-body 
in which this structure lies. Near their origin some branches pass from these to the pro- 
ventriculus. In the level part of its course each trunk gives off branches which pass outwards 
andventrally to the neighbouring dorso-ventral indirect wing muscle, and, about their middle 
dorsally, another branch on each side is given off which, passing upwards, lies close on each 
side of the aorta and breaks up into branches in the medium gap between the longitudinal 
muscles of the two sides. Where these branches contact the heart this organ has thickened 
walls and a number of closely aggregated nuclei (see ‘Aorta ‘, p. 616 and Fig. 73 (3)). . 
611 39-2 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
The tracheal supply of the conjoined ganglion is derived from (a) branches from the 
trachea of the fore-leg which supplies the prothoracic ganglion; (b) branches from the 
inner division of Ms. 5 which enter the mesothoracic ganglion; and (c) branches from Mt. 3 
which pass to the posterior part of the conjoined ganglion behind the furca. Large con- 
spicuous nuclei (tracheal cells) are present in the ganglia at the point of entry of branches 
as described for the brain. 
TRACHEATION OF THE ABDOMEN (Fig.71) 
The tracheation of the abdominal segments shows in general considerable uniformity. In 
all the normal segments, that is excluding segments I and VIII which lack spiracles, a short 
straight spiracular trachea (no. 1 of the list of tracheae) passes from the spiracle to the 
tracheal knot at which it, the connective of the previous segment, and that of the segment 
in question meet to form a triple knuckle-like junction (tracheal knot). The connective (2) 
of the segment passes backwards from the knot to the knot of the following segment. It is 
usually thrown into a wavy or coiled course with a loop directed downwards followed by 
one directed upwards (Fig. 71 (1)). Towards the anterior end of the connective there is 
given off the ventral trachea (3) which passes ventrally and usually a little backwards to 
supply the ventral portion of the segment with a branch to the ganglion. From the more 
posterior bend a branch is given off dorsally, dorsal trachea (4), which supplies the dorsal 
portion of the segment. This branch is large in the more anterior segments, becoming 
increasingly smaller in the segments towards the posterior end of the abdomen. A small 
ventrally directed branch, accessory ventral (5), is commonly present taking off opposite 
the dorsal branch. 
Where the connective from the previous section joints the knot a trachea takes origin on 
the inner side of the knot and passes inwards and very characteristically forwards to supply 
viscera, visceral trachea (6). The viscera supplied are usually situated from one to several 
segments anterior to that from which the trachea takes origin. The visceral tracheae from 
segments II-V largely supply branches to the mid-gut, those from VI and VII mainly 
supply the Malpighian tubules. In segments V-VII, in addition to those branches already 
noted, there is a large trachea taking origin from the posterior part of the knot on its inner 
aspect which tends to pass backwards to supply important organs, posterior visceral (7). 
In segments V and VI this passes to the ovary where it forms a close coiled or more open 
plexus depending on the state of development of this organ. In the male it supplies 
branches to the testis. In segment VII it provides tracheal supply to the anterior dilated 
portion of the rectum, including the network in the rectal papillae (see chapter xx and 
Fig. 55 (4)). This trachea often forms a loop, at first passing forwards and then back- 
wards dorsal to the rectum. It sends a branch also forwards. 
Tracheation of segments I and VIII departs somewhat from the above, though to some 
extent homologous tracheae are present. In segment I there is no spiracle and no spiracular 
trachea. A trachea passes forwards into the segment from the knot of segment II which 
gives off a dorsal branch and probably represents the connective. Anteriorly it has con- 
nection with the abdominal continuation of the thoracic trunk which at this level still shows 
some cavity. Another trachea takes origin from the trachea of the third leg and enters the 
segment anteriorly. It forms an upward loop and then passes into the ventral part of the 
segment. It possibly represents in its terminal portion the ventral trachea of the first 
612 
TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
segment, its first part being connective, that is the posterior part of the loop from which the 
trachea of the third leg takes origin. 
In segment VIII there is again no spiracle. But the connective from segment VII passes 
to a point towards the anterior end of segment VIII from which a number of tracheae take 
origin (Fig. 71 (2), (3) a). One of these tracheae divides into a branch continuing laterally 
and one directed ventrally to the region of the spermathecae and common oviduct. Its 
appearance suggests that it may represent the connective for segment VIII giving off the 
ventral branch for this segment. A stout straight trachea passes deeper in along the side 
of the rectum ending in a brush of small branches supplying the parts in the rectal and anal 
area. It might correspond to the posterior visceral. A small branch directed anteriorly may 
be the visceral. There is in fact every indication that this point towards the anterior end of 
segment VIII represents the tracheal knot of that segment. 
In the description of the imaginal circulatory system given later in this chapter there is 
a reference to the fact that the outer edges of the remnants of tissue which in the imago 
represent the larval abdominal trunks are characteristically scalloped. The scalloping is due 
to the trunks, even in this stage, retaining their connection by projecting points with the 
functional tracheal knots, the edge being concave between these points. It is there further 
noted that one such point connects with the tracheal knot of the eighth segment, a further 
support for the view that this is in fact a tracheal knot of the segmental series. Tt was at this 
stage that it occurred to me to re-examine the larval structures in this connection. At once 
it became evident that the supposed tracheal knot in the imago was exactly repeating 
conditions at the point at the base of the siphon tracheal trunk from which arose tracheae 
nos. 53-8 (see Fig. 29 (4)). The only difference was that the trunk had been done away with. 
The knot in the imago has actually the rather peculiar appearance of having been left, so 
to speak, hanging. 
If the characters of the abdominal spiracles in the imago are borne in mind, that is the 
small outer taenidia-free chamber, the constriction at its base and the stout open trachea 
leading to the tracheal knot of the segment, it is further not unreasonable to correlate these 
structures with those of the terminal spiracles and the siphon trunks. On such a basis the 
larval respiratory siphon consists of spiracles and spiracular tracheae of the eighth segment 
that have been carried backwards taking with them the ninth tergite as already hypothe- 
cated on other grounds, the projecting mass being secondarily provided with sclerotised 
support, the siphon tube. 
Before concluding, attention may be drawn to a notable feature of the imaginal trachea- 
tion, namely the almost negligible degree of communication between the thoracic and the 
abdominal systems. This virtual isolation of the two areas, already suggested by the great 
difference in the types of spiracle, would seem possibly to have some physiological reason. 
An explanation might be that the two systems in the imago have to meet different require- 
ments, that of the abdomen to meet ordinary tissue requirements with the means of regu- 
lating entry of air in accordance with conditions of humidity, etc., and of a more or less 
permanent character, and that of the thorax to meet sudden calls for an ample oxygen 
supply for the great muscles in flight, with at other times little air interchange. It might be 
advantageous in such circumstances that the two systems did not communicate too freely. 
613 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
(d) THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM AND 
ASSOCIATED TISSUES 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
An account of the heart and associated tissues in the larva has already been given. Apart 
from some early references (Christophers, 1901; Eysell, 19 13), there has been little in the 
literature regarding the heart and circulatory system in the imaginal mosquito. Recently, 
however, a very full account of the structure and physiology of the heart and associated 
organs of larva, pupa and imago in Anopheles, Culex and Ak’des has been given by Jones 
(1952, 1953, 1954) who also deals with the technique for examination of living material in 
the imago. 
That the pulsations of the heart in the living condition are readily studied in the larva 
through the cuticle has already been noted. That this is also possible in the imago under 
the dissecting microscope up to a magnification of 250 has been shown by Jones, quoted 
above. For this the insects, preferably one-day mosquitoes fed on sugar solution, are glued 
to the slide by the wings and tip of the abdomen, or with the dorsal surface downwards 
and the slide examined reversed. A special resin, Resin Adhesive no. 502, manufactured 
by Southern Adhesives Corporation, was used for the purpose. The insects so put up may be 
kept alive in damp petri dishes. Observations are helped by removal of scales with a soft 
brush. In counting the heart beats it is desirable to record the time for a limited number of 
beats and to reduce this to beats per minute, since counting is liable to be interfered with 
by temporary cessation of beats. 
Besides the study of serial sections useful information can be obtained from mounts made 
from sliced hardened material suitably stained. Such a preparation of the dorsum of the 
abdomen shows well the characters of the heart and its accessory structures and can be 
used for examination under polarised light. 
As in the larva the chief propulsatory organ is the dorsal vessel. This is divisible into an 
abdominal portion, the heart, provided with ostia and associated pericardial cells and alary 
muscles, and a thoracic portion, the aorta, devoid of these structures. 
THE HEART (Fig. 73 (l-3)) 
The heart is a thin-walled muscular tube with laterally placed nuclei at intervals along its 
course. Its walls show circular and oblique striae as in the larva. It extends from the 
posterior end of segment VII to the metathorax, lying close beneath the tergites. Towards 
the anterior end of each of segments I-VII there is a pair of lateral ostia. These appear as 
pouch-like clefts in the lateral wall and their presence is further indicated at each ostium 
by a pair of small nuclei, markedly smaller than those of the heart wall. These are the 
nuclei of the ostial cells bordering the openings as in the larva. The ostial cells in the imago 
appear to be less distinctly crescentic and more ballooned than are those in the larva, so 
that the ostia appear commonly as double-walled blebs in the wall of the heart. Anterior 
to each pair of ostia, that is, in the region of the group of pericardial cells as described 
below, the wall of the heart is somewhat bulged, giving rise to pulsatory chambers of which, 
counting the terminal chamber, there are eight. 
At its anterior end, a little in front of the first pair of ostia, the heart enters the thorax to 
become the aorta. Posteriorly it becomes narrower and ends towards the posterior end of 
614 
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
segment VII. At its termination it is somewhat blunt dorsally but is continued ventrally as 
a tapering extension, much as in the larva. Whether there are terminal ostia seems doubtful 
and the elaborate surrounding tracheal meshwork of the larva is entirely lacking. 
Pericardial cells (Fig. 73 (2) PC). Ranged along each side of the heart are groups of peri- 
cardial cells (dorsal nephrocytes). These are present in groups of four pairs at each inter- 
segment, two pairs lying in the hinder portion of the segment in front and two pairs in the 
fore portion of the segment behind, except in segment I, where anteriorly there is only a 
single pair, and intersegment VII-VIII, where there are two pairs in the hinder part of 
segment VII and none in segment VIII. Altogether there are, therefore, twenty-seven pairs. 
Some variation in numbers of cells at the anterior end of segment I and at the VII-VIII 
intersegment may occur as noted by Rajindar Pal (1944), who gives two pairs as usually 
present in the anterior group which are considered to be in the metathorax. The single pair 
in AL;des aegypti imago has an alary muscle, however, which appears to be in abdominal 
segment I. 
The cells closely resemble those in the larva, usually possessing two nuclei and other 
characters as described for them. The above description refers to large, characteristic 
pericardial cells of the older literature. Jones, Zoc cit., however, describes additional small 
and medium nephrocytes as also present. Including such, the dorsal nephrocytes according 
to Jones, Zoc. cit., may in some species be present in considerable numbers, some hundreds 
being present in Anopheles quadrimaculatus. In Agdes aegypti, in material studied by me, 
no other cells comparable in size with the typical pericardial cells and resembling them in 
appearance have been present near the heart, the groups of four pairs, each cell with its 
alary muscle as described below being highly characteristic and, with the exceptions noted, 
repeated with great regularity in the segments. It is not known whether conditions of 
breeding or maintenance may affect the appearances seen. 
Alary muscles (Fig. 73 (2) aim). At each set of four pairs of pericardial cells there are four 
pairs of branched alary muscles. These take origin from the hypodermis at the intersegment 
laterally as one muscular stem anterior to, and one posterior to, the intersegmental line, 
each stem then dividing into two, one for each pericardial cell. Each of these branches 
further divides into some four or five or more branches spreading out fan-wise above and 
below the pericardial cell and then ending in a fine network of fibrils, resembling a spider’s 
web, beneath the heart. This meshwork extends for some little distance anterior and 
posterior to the area of the four pairs of pericardial cells, that is, approximately over the 
area of the pulsatory chamber, but does not equally cover the whole of the intervening 
area between the groups. The meshwork of branches and fibrillae divides off a chamber in 
which the heart lies, the dorsal or pericardial sinus, the meshwork itself forming the dorsal 
diaphragm. From the nature of its origin the dorsal diaphragm has a scalloped outer 
border, the concavities of the scallop corresponding to the intervals between the groups of 
four alary muscles. An alary muscle is present for each of the pericardial cells at the 
anterior part of segment I. No muscles appear to be present for the two pairs of cells at 
intersegment VII-VIII. 
The tracheal trunk remnants (Fig. 73 (1) c). Lying on each side of the heart external to the 
dorsal diaphragm and lying over the stems of the alary muscles there is commonly a more 
or less distinct band of tissue formed by the disorganised and flattened remains of the 
615 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
abdominal tracheal trunks. These bands, their appearances depending probably on the 
age of the mosquito, show more or less distinctly tracheal tissue with large nuclei, but 
infiltrated with small cells containing deeply staining granules (‘phagocytes’). On the 
inner side these bands are slightly scalloped, the projecting portions lying against the 
groups of pericardial cells and, where there have been tracheal commissures, tracheal 
tissue lies across and dorsal to the heart. Externally, as noted under the tracheal system, 
the bands are also scalloped, the points contacting the tracheal knots of the corresponding 
side. The bands, now narrowed, continue into the eighth segment approaching each other 
in the middle line and contacting the structures described as probably representing the 
tracheal knots of the eighth segment, an interesting relic in the imago of the larval terminal 
spiracles (see under tracheal system of the imago). 
The aorta (Fig. 73 (3), (6), (7) ao). 0 n entering the thorax the dorsal vessel takes on the 
characters of the aorta. This is somewhat narrower than the heart, lacks ostia and is not 
accompanied by pericardial cells or alary muscles. Throughout most of its course in the 
thorax the aorta no longer lies close beneath the tergites but is situated deeply just below 
the lower border of the longitudinal indirect wing muscles embedded in a flat lobe of fat- 
body situated in the median space between the longitudinal muscular bundles of the two 
sides. Lateral to it lie bundles of the dorsal protomorphic muscles (representing the 
Figure 73. Circulatory system. 
Dorsal view of heart and related tissues. Female imago. a, still patent thoracic tracheal trunk 
passing into abdomen; b, point where trunk makes contact with functional tracheal system of 
abdomen in segment I representing tracheal knot of segment I; c, showing extent of tissue 
representing obsolescent tracheal trunk; d, tracheal knots of functional system with which the 
obsolescent tracheal trunks still maintain contact; e, tracheal knot of segment VIII; e’, con- 
tinuation of trunk into segment VIII. 
Portion of heart showing pericardial cells and alary muscle. a, network of alary muscle 
branches; b, nuclei of heart wall. 
Portion of thoracic aorta where crossed by tracheae arising from thoracic trunks. a, thickened 
wall of aorta; b, tracheae impinging on aorta; c, muscular bundles of protomorphic system 
alongside which the aorta passes. 
Coronal section of scutellum showing pulsatory muscle. a, muscle no. 43. Dorsal transverse 
muscle of scutellum; b, lateral lobe of scutellum; c, median space between longitudinal 
indirect wing muscles of the two sides (seen in cross-section). 
Portion of ventral diaphragm. a, lateral intersegmental point and origin of segmental muscles; 
b, portion of ventral diaphragm. 
Sagittal section through frons and anterior termination of the aorta. a, bundle of muscular 
fibres passing from aortic wall to Clements’ organ. 
Coronal section of same. a, Clements’ organ; b, muscular fibres passing from aorta. 
Lettering : ah, alary muscles; ao, aorta; Bc, buccal cavity; Br, brain; F, frons; fg, frontal 
ganglion; ft, lobe of fat-body; ht, heart; OS, position of ostium; P’, anterior end of oesophageal 
pump ; pc, pericardial cells (dorsal nephrocytes) ; I-VIII, abdominal segments. 
Muscles: 7d, most posterior of elevators of the buccal cavity at insertion into membrane 
between oesophageal pump and buccal cavity. 19, valvular muscles: middle line of frons between 
scapes to roof of anterior end of oesophageal pump. 21, dorsal rectractors of buccal cavity: 
middle line of frons between dorsal ocelli (Clements’ organ) to flanges of buccal cavity. 22, acces- 
sory dorsal retractors of buccal cavity: arising in common with 21 and inserted into the anterior 
end of dorsal plate of oesophageal pump. 
616 
0 Lzl t, _. qa ‘oDft \3\ *\ ’ . , .‘. . .,:” A’ ’ ;; , *. :. ‘. -:.: 
\.. _.a..- _ ,/ 
., - _ __._-A-_-_- :-- - 
a 01 mm. 
L__._J 4 
Figure 73 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
thoracic continuation of the dorsal longitudinal muscles of the abdominal segments). Its 
structure is similar to that of the heart with laterally placed nuclei at intervals. About the 
middle of its course two small tracheae coming from the thoracic trunks pass on each side 
of it impinging on its walls which at this point show clustered nuclei and are somewhat 
thickened (Fig. 73 (3)). On reaching the level of the proventriculus the aorta dips down to 
pass beneath the anterior tracheal commissure. A little before doing so it is again crossed 
on each side by a small trachea coming from the angles of the thoracic trunks. Here also 
to a less degree the wall shows clustered nuclei and is thickened. Passing between the 
corpora allata and close beneath the commissure the aorta passes forward to enter the 
head. 
The prothoracic aortic sinus. An important structural feature is described by Jones, Zoc. cit., 
under the name of the prothoracic aortic sinus. This is a dilated portion of the aorta lying 
just behind the tracheal commissure where the aorta passes between the corpora allata. 
It is described as having an intra-aortic thickening (valve) posteriorly and a valve where it 
passes beneath the tracheal commissure. It is especially conspicuous in the early larval 
stage. In the imago of Acdes aegypti the structure in sections is often not conspicuous. 
But in some cases a considerable expansion or even ballooning of the aorta is present 
behind the tracheal crossing. The posterior valve referred to may be the thickening and 
collection of nuclei described above where the aorta is crossed by a small trachea. I have 
not been able to detect any valve at the crossing of the commissure, though the com- 
missure itself may act as such. 
The anterior termination of the aorta (Fig. 73 (6), (7)). Passing forwards through the neck 
the aorta enters the head through the occipital foramen over the posterior end of the 
oesophageal pump and then along the hollow of the dorsal plate of this organ to the cerebral 
commissure. In doing so it lies over the hypocerebral ganglion with the entering recurrent 
pharyngeal nerve of the retro-cerebral system. 
On emerging from beneath the cerebral commissure the aorta is still recognisable as a 
tube with laterally placed nuclei more or less semicircular in section with a flat floor where 
it lies upon the narrow anterior portion of the dorsal plate of the oesophageal pump 
towards its anterior termination. At this point a bundle of muscular fibres passes from its 
lateral walls to each of the dorsal ocelli (organs of Clements). These appear to be what 
Thompson (1905) took to be nerves from the brain. They are, however, clearly connected 
with the aorta and are muscular in nature. Beyond this the aorta is still traceable but with 
walls now thin and membranous and closely associated with the sarcolemma of certain 
small muscles, namely nos. 21, 22 and 19. The space now representing the aorta, probably 
to be regarded as a blood sinus, widens laterally over the anterior end of the oesophageal 
pump until it entirely surrounds this structure. In doing so its dorsal extent reaches to the 
frontal ganglion where it appears to end. Ventrally it widens considerably and appears to 
open downwards to the region beneath the floor of the buccal cavity, but it is difficult to 
ascertain with certainty its limits. 
The walls of the sinus so far as described above are formed of thin but distinct membrane 
(see Fig. 73 (6), (7) ao). A s with the termination of the aorta in the larva the membrane is 
closely connected with the sarcolemma of the muscles mentioned above. Muscle 21 
passing to its insertion into the lateral cornu of the buccal cavity lies on each side external 
to it. Muscle 22 coming from the same origin as 21, that is the most posterior portion of 
618 
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
the frons, passes as a twin muscle inside the two muscles no. 21 to be inserted into the 
dorsal plate of the pump towards its anterior end; and muscle 19 coming from the fore 
part of the frons and directed somewhat backwards is inserted just in front of muscle 
no. 22 at the junction of the dorsal plate with the membrane connecting the pump with the 
buccal cavity. Curiously both muscles nos. 19 and 21 perforate the membrane to reach 
their insertion. It is not possible without a more certain knowledge of the homologies of 
the imaginal and larval muscles concerned to say with certainty if the imaginal aorta 
terminates at the same point as the larval. But allowing for the great forward development 
of the brain in the imago and the pushing forwards of any muscles arising in front of it 
from the frons there would seem to be no great difference. It can, however, be said that 
with the contraction of the fore part of the head in passing from larva to imago, bringing 
the frons from a wide expanse occupying most of the dorsum of the head to a narrow and 
short median inverted apodeme between the now almost touching antenna1 bases, the scale 
of the structures concerned is greatly reduced. 
ACCESSORY PULSATORY STRUCTURES (Fig.73(4),(5)) 
Certain accessory pulsatory organs are commonly present in insects. In the imaginal 
mosquito the following are noted by Jones, Zoc cit., in addition to the prothoracic aortic 
sinus, which may be so considered, namely (1) a muscular diaphragm above the nerve 
cord; (2) a pulsatile muscle in the scutellum; (3) possible pulsatile structures in the legs; 
(4) Clement’s organ. 
The muscular diaphragm above the nerve cord is somewhat after the plan of the alar-y 
muscles dorsally, but without distinct muscular elements. It consists of fan-shaped sheets 
of delicate transparent membrane with striae which are presumably muscular in nature and 
scattered small nuclei (Fig. 73 (5) b). The sheets arise from the intersegmental line some- 
what laterally and converge to form a layer, with scalloped outer edge, lying over the nerve 
cord and ventral fat-body. 
What may be a pulsatile organ is muscle no. 43. This is a sheet of muscle of skeletal type 
extending across the scutellum from one lateral lobe to the other and in the middle arching 
nearly to the roof of the middle lobe (Fig. 73 (4) a). It rests upon a small lobe of fat-body 
and is situated behind the longitudinal indirect wing muscles. There is no appearance of 
any blood sinus structure, but the median gap between the longitudinal wing muscles of 
the two sides may afford passage for haemolymph so that contraction of the muscle may 
assist circulation of this fluid. A similar muscle is described by Maki (1938) in a tipulid and 
is thought to be a pulsatory organ. 
Pulsatory organs are described in the legs of certain insects. Such have not so far been 
described in the mosquito. Septa are present in all the legs extending to the tarsal segments. 
These begin in the coxae and are present in trochanter, femur and tibia stretched across the 
limb with the leg trachea incorporated in their substance. 
The nature of the curious organ situated on each side in the frontal region of the head 
described by Clements (1953,1956a, b) and Day (1955), and which has been referred to in the 
section on the tracheal system, is not very certain. It seems certain, however (see Clements, 
1956 b), that it is not a tracheal sac, as might be suggested by the tracheal-like appearance 
of the passage leading into the antenna1 filament, but an accessory propulsatory organ as 
has been described in a number of insects (Pawlowa, 1895; Brother, 1922; Freudenstein, 
619 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
1928 ; see also Wigglesworth, 1942a, p. 224). As the structure of this curious organ is, 
however, somewhat complex and as it appears to be essentially of the nature of a modified 
dorsal ocellus, its full description may conveniently be deferred to the section on special 
sense organs even though its functions in this respect have presumably been lost. 
Very briefly it consists on each side of a sac situated in the frontal region between the 
two compound eyes and a little dorsal and external to the bases of the antennae (Fig. 53 
(1) oc’). From the sac a stout tube, very like a tracheal vessel but lacking taenidia, extends 
to the base of the antenna of its side and passing through the central gap in Johnston’s 
organ along with the nerve to the antenna1 filament enters and passes along that structure. 
For further details see under ‘ Special sense organs ‘, p. 648. 
HAEMOCYTES,OENOCYTES AND VENTRAL NEPHROCYTES 
For literature relating to haemocytes see under ‘Circulatory system of the larva’, p. 337. In 
the imago, except for the presence of phagocytic cells associated with structures undergoing 
absorption, haemocytes are not conspicuous and what has been said under the larva must 
suffice. The phagocytic cells as seen in fixed preparations are most noticeable on account 
of deeply stained globules. The cells are about 6-8,~ in diameter with a round nucleus about 
3,~ in diameter. Their cytoplasm contains relatively large globules up to about 2,~ in 
diameter that stain intensely in preparations stained with haematoxylin. They are especi- 
ally numerous about the abdominal tracheal trunks undergoing absorption, but occur in 
other situations such as clustered about muscle fibres or free. 
The conspicuous groups of large oenocytes seen in the abdominal segments of the larva 
are lacking or represented only by groups of distorted cells clearly in process of dis- 
appearing. According to Hosselet (1925) the large oenocytes are present throughout the 
larval period, attain their maximum during pupation, and disappear in the adult stage. 
Some small oenocytes bordering the fat-body in the ventral regions of the segments are 
present, but appear to be much less numerous than in the larva. 
The ventral nephrocytes are cells very similar in appearance to the pericardial cells. They 
are present in the imago as a cluster of five or more cells on the lower surface of the lobe 
of fat-body in which the salivary glands lie and a little anterior to the ventral transverse 
muscle. Jensen (1953) describes a method of dissecting the salivary glands in Anopheles 
by which the ventral nephrocytes are displayed. 
THE FAT-BODY (Fig.74) 
As in the larva the fat-body in the imago consists of a peripheral and a visceral layer. It is, 
however, for the most part much less massive and more broken up, especially in the thorax, 
owing to the greater development of muscles and the more complicated cuticular structure. 
In the head there is a layer of peripheral fat-body over the occipital and genal areas 
extending to the posterior margins of the compound eyes (1). Other smaller masses are in 
the frontal area and basal lobes of the antennae (2). There is a long narrow strand on each 
side accompanying the tentorium (3), a lobe on each side at the junction of the buccal 
cavity and oesophageal pump (4), and one in the labial region (5). 
The thoracic fat-body is relatively small in amount and much broken up. There is, 
however, an extensive layer of peripheral fat-body over such parts of the scutum as are not 
occupied by insertions of the indirect wing muscles (6). In the median line this layer sends 
620 
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
rbh \. 
a crescentic extension into the gap between the insertions of the Thinal wing muscles ’ 
of the two sides (6a). At its posterior end this vertical sheet is continued as a flat ribbon- 
like extension just short of the scutellum in which there is a small transverse lobe referred 
to when discussing accessory pulsatory organs (6~). Anteriorly in the space on each side 
not occupied by the dorso-ventral muscles the scutal fat-body forms a considerable mass, 
the largest unbroken area of fat-body in the thorax (66). From these areas the scutal fat- 
body is continued down on each side of the anterior promontory to the dorsal aspect of 
the root of the neck where there is a somewhat distinct lobular mass at the base of the neck 
dorsally (7). Over the pleurae the peripheral fat layer is thin and broken; but there are 
thickened portions with extensions passing inwards making junction with deeper portions 
of fat substance behind and among the muscles (8). One of these is continued inwards in 
the anterior spiracular area accompanying the large tracheal vessels @a). Another is 
between the anterior and posterior dorso-ventral muscle bands (8b) and still another 
posterior to the latter muscle in the metathoracic area and the posterior spiracular tracheal 
branches (8 c). 
The visceral fat-body is in the form of longitudinal strands associated with the thoracic 
viscera. A thin median vertical sheet passes backwards from just above the base of the 
neck between the lower bundles of the longitudinal indirect wing muscles of the two sides 
and extends back to the metathorax (9). In this the aorta lies embedded for much of its 
course. A second portion of visceral fat-body lies in the middle line of the thorax ventrally 
beneath the oesophagus, proventriculus and ventral diverticulum and above the thoracic 
ganglia. Its anterior portion supports the salivary gland acini and on its lower surface are 
the ventral nephrocytes (lOa). Beyond the furca this portion of fat-body forms a layer 
surrounding the narrow portion of the mid-gut, the ventral diverticulum and the ventral 
series of protomorphic muscular strands, that is, it surrounds the thoracic viscera proper, 
as distinct from the large mass of secondary muscle in the thorax (lob). In this region it 
forms also a considerable vertical sheet on each side internal to the posterior dorso-ventral 
indirect wing muscle bundles (10~) and passing backwards eventually comes to lie 
beneath the flattened tracheal trunk of its side accompanying this into the first abdominal 
segment (104. 
In the abdomen the peripheral layer is to a large extent divided by gaps at the inter- 
segmental lines so that the fat-body of each segment is to a considerable extent distinct. 
It is further partially divided into lobe-like masses by the presence, or previous presence, 
before these have been absorbed, of the abdominal muscular bands. Dorsally there is a gap 
occupied by the heart. Ventrally it forms a median ridge continuous from segment to 
segment on which the nerve cord lies (11). Laterally it forms a thick sheet covering the 
side of the segment dorsal and ventral to the infolded pleural membrane. On the inner 
aspect of the sheet are lobular extensions which extend inwards and assist in supporting 
the viscera. The lobes show an intimate relation to tracheal branches around which they 
largely lie (Fig. 74 (2)). 
The fat-body plays an important role in the life history of the insect and shows changes 
in relation to the different stages of development. These changes have been especially 
studied by De Boissezon (1930a, b, c; 1932) in Culex pipiens (see also Roubaud, 1932; 
Buxton, 1935 ; and Wigglesworth, 1942 b). According to De Boissezon the fat-body is 
composed entirely of one type of cell, trophocytes. These show three forms of inclusions in 
their cytoplasm, namely fat-globules that stain black with osmic acid; albuminoid granules 
621 
AK AGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
that stain pink with I n’s reagent; and brown refractire granules consisting of purine 
material @rates). In the two-day-old larva the trophocytes are small cells with irregular 
contour, measuring 10-15~ in diameter, with strongly basophil cytoplasm already con- 
taining fat globules 3-4~ in diameter. When the larva approaches full growth the tro- 
phocytes reach a size of 20-22~ and the cytoplasm has become clear and acidophile and 
loaded with inclusions. The fat globules have increased in size to 5-6~ and the albuminoid 
granules to 4-Q. In the imago the fat-body tissue for the first 24 hours is as described. 
But if the mosquito is unfed the albuminoid granules entirely disappear, being used up in 
the maturation of the eggs. 
The conditions are very similar in AYes aegypti. The fat-body consists of cells (tro- 
phocytes) with globular nuclei measuring in all stages from the first instar to the imago 
approximately the same size (4-6~ in diameter). Depending upon the stage of development 
and conditions the cytoplasm is variously loaded with inclusions and the cell outlines 
usually obscured. In the first instar immediately following hatching the cytoplasm already 
has its characteristic vacuolated appearance with occasional fat globules up to 5,u in 
diameter (Fig. 74 (4)). Usually it also shows the characteristic brown refractile granules 
such as are usually only seen in the later stages of development. It is possible that these 
granules, which are very characteristic of this stage, are the result of metabolism during the 
period of diapause in the egg, though this has not been verified. By the third instar the 
cells have become packed with fat globules up to about 3,~ in diameter and small albumi- 
noid spheres up to 2-3~ in diameter are also present (Fig. 74 (5) a). In the fourth instar 
still larger fat globules are present with albuminoid spheres up to 2-3~ in diameter with 
numerous smaller spheres. Just before pupation there is almost as much albuminoid material 
as fat globules, many of the spheres reaching a diameter of 6~ (Fig. 74 (6) a). Much the 
same appearances are present through the pupal stage and in the newly emerged imago. 
Figure 74. The fat-body. 
Showing the fat-body in the head and thorax (reconstruction). The figures are those given to 
the lobes in the text. 
Preparation showing lateral view of the fat-body of an abdominal segment and relation to 
tracheal branches. a, portion of lateral lobe dorsal to pleural membrane; b, portion of same 
ventral to pleural membrane; c, ventral fat-body; g, ganglion; sp, spiracle; vt, ventral trachea. 
Lateral portion of an abdominal segment of a newly hatched first instar larva, showing 
refractile brown granules. 
Lobe of fat-body in newly hatched first instar larva more highly magnified, showing refractile 
brown granules (camera lucida). Section stained with haematoxylin and eosin. 
Portion of fat-body of pre-ecdysis third instar larva, showing accumulation of moderate-sized 
fat globules and small albuminoid sphere stained black with Heidenhein’s haematoxylin. 
Same magnification as 4. 
Portion of fat-body of imago half an hour from emergence, showing cells packed with fat 
globules, many of large size, large albuminoid spheres and some purine bodies (pseudonuclei). 
Spheres stained black with Heidenhein’s haematoxylin. Same magnification as 4. a, albu- 
minoid spheres; b, purine bodies. 
Portion of fat- body of imago three days from emergence without food, showing absence of all 
reserves other than reduced fat globules. Same magnification as 4. 
Fat-body of imago 48 hours after blood feed, showing absence of albuminoid spheres and 
numerous purine granules (c). 
622 
O-Olmm. 
I I 4 
Figure 74 
623 
IMAGO: INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
Some days after emergence, though fat globules are still present, albuminoid spheres and 
granules have almost entirely disappeared and the most noticeable feature is the increasing 
number of brown refractile granules some of which, situated in the centre of spherical 
globules, give the appearance of nuclei (the so-called ‘pseudonuclei’). Following a blood 
meal the fat-body does not appear to receive further reserve material which is apparently 
diverted to growth of the egg follicles. 
REFERENCES 
(C) THE TRACHEAL SYSTEM 
ALESSANDRINI, G. and MISSIROLI, A. (1926). Sulla struttura dell’apparato respiratorio delle 
Anopheles. Riv. di Malarial. 5 (n.s. I), 35-43. 
BAKER, J. R. (1945). Cytological technique. Ed. 2. Methuen and Co., London. 
BODENHEIMER, F. (1923). Beitrgge zur Kenntnis der Kohlschntike, Tipula oleracea. 2. wiss. Zool. 
121, 393-441. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). The anatomy and histology of the adult female mosquito. Rep. 
Malar. Comm. R. Sot. (4), l-20. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. and BARRAUD, P. J. (1924). The tracheation and venation of the wing of the 
mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 11, 1103-17. 
FEUERBORN, H. J. (1927). Die Metamorphose von Psychoda alternata Say. I. Die Umbildungs- 
vorggnge am Kopf und Thorax. Zool. Anz. 70, 315-28. 
GIGLIOLI, M. E. C. (1953). A way of studying structures in insects by whole mounts. Trans. R. 
Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 47, 266-7. 
HASSAN, A. A. G. (1944). The structure and mechanism of the spiracular regulating apparatus in 
adult Diptera and certain other groups of insects. Trans. R. Sot. Ent. Lond. 94, 103-53. 
HURST, C. H. (1890). The Pupal Stage of Culex. Guardian Printing Works, Manchester. 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). Textbook of Entomology. Ed. 4. Methuen and Co., London. 
KENNEDY, C. H. (1922). The homologies of the tracheal branches in the respiratory system of 
insects. Ohio J. Sci. 22, 84-9. 
LANDA, V. (1948). Contributions to the anatomy of Ephemerid larvae. I. Topography and 
anatomy of tracheal systems. M&in. Sot. 2002. tche’cosl. 12. 
LEHMANN, F. E. (1926). uber die Entwicklung des Tracheensystems, etc. In Leuzinger, Weis- 
mann and Lehmann, Zur Kenntnis der Anatomie und Entwicklungsgeschichte der Stab- 
heuschrecke, etc. Gustav Fischer, Jena, pp. 330-414. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1901). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., Camb., 1, 
45 l-84. 
POUCHET, G. (1872). Developpement du systkme trachien de l’Anoph&le (Corethra plumicornis). 
Arch. Zool. Exp. 1, 217-31. 
RIPPER, W. (1931). Versuch einer Kritik der Homologiefrage der Arthropodentracheen. Z. wiss. 
Zool. 138, 303-69. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). The Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York and London. 
TAYLOR, T. H. (1902). On the tracheal system of Simulium. Trans. Ent. Sot. Lond. 1902, 701-16. 
WEBER, H. (1938). Grundriss der Insektenkunde. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1950). A new method for injecting the tracheae and tracheoles of insects. 
Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 91, 217-23. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1953). Surface forces in the tracheal system of insects. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 
94, 507-22. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1954). Growth and regeneration in the tracheal system of an insect, 
Rhodnius prolixus (Hemiptera). Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 95, 115-137. 
624 
REFERENCES 
(d) THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM AND ASSOCIATED TISSUES 
BROCHER, F. (1922). Etude experimentale sur le fonctionnement du vaisseau dorsal et sur la 
circulation du sang chez les insectes. 5. La Periplaneta orientalis. Ann. Sot. Ent. Fr. 91, 
156-64. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1935). Changes in the composition of adult Culex pipiens during hibernation. 
Parasitology, 27, 263-5. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). See under section (c). 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1953). Organ of unknown function in the head of mosquitoes. Proc. R. Ent. 
Sot. Lond. (C), 18, 44. 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1956a). (Exhibit.) Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 21, 7. 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1956 b). The antenna1 pulsating organs of mosquitoes and other Diptera. Quart. 
J. Micr. Sci. 97, 429-33. 
DAY, M. F. (1955). A new sense organ in the head of the mosquito and other Nematocerous flies. 
Aust. J. Zool. 3, 331-5. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1930a). Contribution a l’etude de la biologie et de histophysiologie de Culex 
pipiens. Arch. Zool. Exp. Gen. 70, 28 l-431. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1930b). Les reserves dans le corps gras de Culex pipiens et leur role dans la 
maturation des ceufs. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 103, 1232-3. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1930 c). Le role du corps gras comme rein d’accumulation chez Culex pipiens 
et chez Theobaldia annulata. C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 103, 1233-5. 
DE BOISSEZON, P. (1932). Localisation du glycogene et du fer chez Culexpipiens. C.R. Sot. Biol., 
Paris, 111, 866-7. 
EYSELL, A. (1913). Die Stechmiicken. In Mense’s Handb. TropenKr. Ed. 2, 1, 97-183. 
FREUDENSTEIN, K. (1928). Das Herz und das Circulationssystem der Honigbiene (Apis melhfica 
L.). Z. wiss. Zool. 132, 404-75. 
HOSSELET, C. (1925). Les oenocytes de Culex annulatus et l’etude de leur chondriome au tours 
de la secretion. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 180, 399-401. 
JENSEN, D. V. (1953). See references in ch. XXVI (a). 
JONES, J. C. (1952). Prothoracic aortic sinuses in Anopheles, Culex and Aedes. Proc. Ent. Sot. 
Wash. 54, 244-6. 
JONES, J. C. (1953). On the heart in relation to circulation of haemocytes in insects. Ann. Ent. 
Sot. Amer. 46, 366-72. 
JONES, J. C. (1954). The heart and associated tissues of Anopheles quadrimaculatus Say (Diptera: 
Culicidae). J. Morph. 94, 71-124. 
MAKI, T. (1938). Studies of the thoracic musculature of insects, etc. See references in ch. XXVI (b). 
PAWLOWA, M. (1895). Uber ampullenartige Blutcirculationsorgane im Kopfe verschiedener 
Orthopteren. Zool. Anz. 18, 7-13. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1944). Nephrocytes in some Culicidae. Diptera. Znd. J. Ent. 6, 143-8. 
ROUBAUD, E. (1932). Des phenomenes d’histolyse larvaire postnymphale et d’alimentation auto- 
trophe chez le moustique commun, Culex pipiens. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 194, 389-91. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942a). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2 (and subsequent 
editions). Methuen and Co., London. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942 b). The storage of protein, fat, glycogen and uric acid in the fat-body 
and other tissues of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. Biol. 19, 56-77. 
40 625 
XXVIII 
THE IMAGO: 
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND 
RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
(e) THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
The imaginal nervous system includes the brain and ventral nerve cord, the peripheral 
nerves, certain ganglia and nerves forming the stomodaeal or stomatogastric system, and 
various sensory nerve systems relating to the cuticle, muscles, viscera and sense organs. For 
literature see general accounts of the nervous system in insects by Snodgrass (1935) ; Weber 
(1933) ; Imms (1938) ; also further references given in the separate sections below, dealing 
with particular parts of the system. 
Nervous structures are characterised by nerve cells, neurocytes, fibre extensions of these, 
axons, branch fibres from neurocytes, dendrites, or from the axons, collateral or terminal 
arborisations. For satisfactory demonstration of axon fibres silver impregnation methods 
have been much used. Some recent techniques are those of Holmes (1947) ; Romanes (1950) ; 
Wigglesworth (1953); and Samuel (1953). For mounted sections spread by the diluted 
glycerine albumen method the technique of Holmes has been found very constantly 
successful, giving interesting colour effects for some tissues as well as staining the axons of 
nervous tissue. Excellent preparations for anatomical structure of the brain and giving 
dark staining of peripheral nerves have been obtained, however, with iron haematoxylin 
using a suitable degree of differentiation. But such preparations do not show neurone 
fibres sharply stained as they are by impregnation methods. 
The anatomical characters of the nervous system of the larva have already been described. 
The chief differences that have resulted in the imago are: (1) Increased size of the brain 
largely due to the great develoment of the optic tracts and antenna1 lobes, but also to the 
thickening of the circum-oesophageal connectives and other changes. Also owing to the 
contraction of the clypeal region in the imago, the brain occupies a more forward position 
in the head and there is some crowding of the cerebral nerves making these less easy to 
trace than in the larva. (2) Some increase in size and complexity of the thoracic ganglia and 
the appearance in the imago of large new nerves necessitated by parts formed from the 
imaginal disks such as the legs and halteres, the nerves to the halteres being among the 
largest in the body. (3) The apparent absence of the median nerve system. 
THE BRAIN 
Literature. So far as I have been able to ascertain no author has described in any detail 
the brain of the mosquito. Nevertheless, there exists an extensive literature dealing with the 
structure of the brain in other insects and without some reference to such work any 
adequate description of the brain of the mosquito could scarcely be given. A number of 
626 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
the earlier papers on the insect brain are by Viallanes (1882-93), including that by Viallanes 
(1893), in which there is given a diagram showing the generalised structure of the insect 
brain that includes much of what is known of the anatomy of this organ and which has 
been reproduced as illustrative of present-day knowledge in at least one important text- 
book. Many other early papers on the brain of different insects are also to be found in 
various zoological journals, for example Newton (1879), on the brain of the cockroach; 
Packard (1880) and Burgess (1 SSO), on the brain of the locust; Kenyon (1896), on the brain 
of the bee with references to earlier papers. More recently there are: Haller (1905), on the 
brain of the bee, of the wasp and of Musca showing neurones stained by the Golgi method; 
Janet (1905) and Thompson (19 13), on the brain of the ant ; Biittger (19 lo), on the brain 
of Lepisma ; Kuhnle (19 13), on that of the earwig. Very helpful is the paper by Jonescu 
(1909), on the brain of the bee, giving a very full description accompanied by figures 
showing transverse sections of the brain at different levels. Still more recently are the papers 
by Baldus (1924), on the larva and imago of LibelMa; of Bretschneider, (19 13-24), on the 
brain of the cockroach and species of Coleoptera and Lepidoptera ; of Hanstrom (1925-30), 
on the larva and imago of Pieris, of the white ant and of the leaf insect; of Holste (1923), 
on the brain of Dytiscus; of Jawlewski (1936), on the brain of beetles; and of Snodgrass 
(1925) on that of the honey-bee. Of special interest in the present connection is the descrip- 
tion by Buxton (1917) of the brain of the small primitive moth, Micropteryx, where as will 
appear the structure seems nearer to that of A?des aegypti than that of most of the above. 
It will be seen that little mention is made of description of the brain of Diptera. Here 
reference can be made to the very full, but not very recent, description of the brain ,of the 
blow-fly by Lowne (1895). Very few other authors have studied the Dipterous brain and 
none apparently that of any species of Nematocera. There is a paper by Brai?dt (1879), 
entitled ‘ Vergleichend-anatom. Untersuchungen iiber das Nervensystem der Zweifliigler ‘, 
which I have not, however, so far seen. Fliigel(1878), discussing structure of the brain in 
the different Orders of insects, has a section on Diptera of one page and mentions Tabanus. 
The optic tracts have been studied by Berger (1878); Hickson (1885) ; Zawarzin (1914) ; 
and by Cajal(l918). For description of neurones and physiological research on relation of 
structure to function see Wigglesworth (1950) and recent papers there quoted. 
Structure(Fig. 75,76) The brain of the imaginal mosquito, as of the larva already described, 
consists of a complex ganglionic mass, the supra-oesophageal ganglion, two thickened 
circum-oesophageal connectives, or cerebral crura, and a composite ganglion, sub-oesophageal 
ganglion, in which are located the nerve centres for the gnathal and labial structures. 
External to the supra-oesophageal ganglion proper on each side are the large optic lobes, 
or as they are commonly termed optic tracts, each forming in the imago almost a third of 
the total brain mass. These parts, however, in the imago are so compacted that, with the 
much thickened crura, they form an almost globular mass perforated by a narrow tunnel 
which just suffices to allow passage of the anterior portion of the oesophageal pump 
accompanied by the aorta and the recurrent pharyngeal nerve (Fig. 75 (4), (14)). 
As in the larva the supra-oesophageal ganglion consists of protocerebrum, deutocerebrum 
and tritocerebrum. The protocerebrum forms the greater part of the supra-oesophageal 
ganglion consisting of two lateral halves, protocerebral lobes. In practice the deuto- 
cerebrum and tritocerebrum are so little differentiated and their limits so uncertain that it 
is often convenient to include these with the respective protocerebral lobes which may then 
627 40-2 
Figure 75. The brain. 
Section through the ganglionic plate showing cortical layer giving off nerve fibres to the 
ommatidia and patterned neuropile. a, cortical layer; b, neuropile; c, cortical layer of external 
medullary mass. The section passes a little dorsal of the level at which the ganglionic plate is 
in contact with the medullary mass and includes only the tip of the latter; d, ommatidia with 
basal layer of pigmented cells and nerve fibres. 
Dorsal view of supra-oesophageal ganglion, showing on the left side the cortical layer and on 
the right the neuropile. 
Ventral view of the same. The cerebral crura are shown as if cut across and the sub-oesophageal 
ganglion removed. The portion of trachea (dorsal cephalic) marks a deep embayment (see 
Fig. 76 (5)) where this is shown in section. 
Brain shown as though sliced in half along the median line. It shows the area over which the 
cerebral lobes are connected and the broad crus flanking the canal in which the anterior 
portion of the oesophageal pump lies with the aorta and recurrent pharyngeal nerve. 
Lettering (Figs. 75 and 76) : A, ganglionic plate ; B, cortical layer of medullary masses ; C, post- 
antenna1 cortical area; D, dorsal cortical area; D’, cell mass lying below level of cortical layer; 
E, cortical area bordering the median fissure with groups of large nerve cells E’, E” ; F, occipital 
cortical area, with dark-staining area F’; G, cortical area of deutocerebrum (antenna1 lobes); 
H, position of tritocerebral lobe; a-e, parts of optic lobe; g. 2, sub-oesophageal ganglion: seen in 
section in Fig. 75 (4) are tracts linking the nerve neuropile masses across the median line; nl, 
neurilemma ; n. 2, antenna1 nerve ; n. 3, fronto-labral nerve ; n. 6, maxillary nerve ; n. 7, labial nerve ; 
tcl, nucleus of tracheal cell; 1, neuropile of ganglionic plate; 2, neuropile of external medullary 
mass ; 3, neuropile of internal medullary mass; 4, neuropile formed by continuation of antenna1 
nerve within the brain; 5, antenna1 neuropile centre showing lobulation; 6-l 1, neuropile masses 
(see text); 12, suboccipital commissure; 13, central body; 14, circum-oesophageal connective 
(crura) ; 15, anterior commissural tract ; 16, layer of neuropile forming dorsal surface layer of 
cerebral commissure ; 17, tritocerebral commissure. 
628 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
be conveniently termed the cerebral lobes as in later parts of this section. The two lateral 
halves of the supra-oesophageal ganglion are joined in the n-riddle line over a limited extent 
of their inner surface to form what may still be regarded as the cerebral commissure. Else- 
where the lobes are separated by a deep median fissure, median fissure, into which the 
neurilemma covering the brain dips. In this considerable degree of separation of the 
two lobes the brain of the mosquito appears to differ from that described for many insects. 
The deutocerebrum is formed by the antennal lobes from which the stout antenna1 nerves 
pass to Johnston’s organ in the base of the antenna. The tritocerebrum is an inconspicuous 
lobe situated on each side ventral and internal to the antenna1 lobes at the base anteriorly 
of the crus of each side. It is chiefly to be located as the situation from which the fronto- 
labral nerve of its side arises. This nerve shortly after leaving the brain turns up in front of 
the lateral flange of the buccal cavity to enter the frontal ganglion as a very short frontal 
ganglion connective and continues as the relatively small labral nerve. 
Histologically the brain, and the optic tracts, consist of an outer layer of nerve cells, 
cortical layer, and an inner mass or masses formed by the ramifications of axons and their 
branches, here termed, following Snodgrass, neuropile. Surrounding the whole is the 
neurilemma, a delicate membrane with scattered lightly staining, small nuclei (Fig. 76 
(1) nl). The supra-oesophageal ganglion is almost entirely sensory and associative in 
function and its cortical layer is composed of very small nerve cells with deeply staining 
nuclei, large in comparison with the cell and measuring as a rule about 6-8,~ in diameter, 
sensory or association new-one cells. Some large cells, motor neurone cells, are present, 
however, in the cortical layer flanking the median furrow. Motor neurone cells are more 
numerous in the sub-oesophageal ganglion from which muscles of the mouth-parts are 
innervated. Here and there embedded in the cortical layer where tracheal branches enter 
the brain substance are the large and conspicuous nuclei of tracheal cells (Fig. 76 (1) tcl). 
The neuropile forms lobulated masses of non-medullated nerve fibres and usually, owing 
to the relative absence of nuclei, stains lightly in sharp contrast to the dark cortical layer. 
It may appear as somewhat indefinite lobe-like masses or as aggregated bundles of fibres 
forming tracts. In material stained by silver impregnation methods sharply defined axon 
fibres are seen traversing the masses in various directions. Special aggregations of these 
constitute the tracts connecting the different neuropile masses. 
The optic lobes (Fig. 75). Each optic lobe consists of three ganglionic masses arranged in 
series, namely from without inwards, the gang/ionic plate (periopticon), the external 
medullary mass (epiopticon) and the internal medullary mass (opticon). 
The ganglionic plate is an oval somewhat mushroom-shaped structure consisting of an 
outer layer of cellular cortex and an inner neuropile mass which, cut in certain directions, 
shows a regular pattern resembling woven fabric (Fig. 75 (1)). Its outer surface and thinned- 
out edges are approximated to the inner surface of the compound eye of its side, but 
separated by a space. Across this space numerous bundles of nerve fibres pass outwards from 
the surface of the ganglionic plate to form a plexus under the basement membrane of the 
omrnatidia(see under ‘ Special sense organs’, p. 652). From the thinned-out posterior margin 
one such nerve tract passes to the pigmented, but now degenerate, lateral ocellus. On its inner 
side the neuropile mass of the ganglionic plate is in contact over its middle portion with 
the neuropile mass of the external medullary mass, the line of junction forming a con- 
spicuous chiasma, outer chiasma. Between the external and internal medullary masses is 
629 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
another line of chiasma, but much narrower than that between the ganglionic plate and 
external medullary mass, inner chiasma. This commonly has the appearance in sections of 
a regular row of small circular spaces with intervening fibre substance (Fig. 76 (5) 2, 3). The 
external and internal medullary masses each have a central rather lens-shaped neuropile 
mass, that of the internal mass being somewhat the smaller. Surrounding these is a common 
layer of cortical cellular substance. This cortical layer is peculiar in being composed of 
smaller, more compacted and more deeply staining cells than is the cortical layer of the 
rest of the brain. This difference in appearance makes it possible in sections to determine 
where the thick cortical layer of the optic tract ends and that of the brain proper begins, 
otherwise the two cortical areas are largely continuous (Fig. 75 (2), (3) B). From the inner 
medullary mass fibres pass inwards to the central neuropile mass of the protocerebrum 
forming what is sometimes regarded as a third chiasma. The intimate structure of the 
tracts is complicated and for information the literature should be consulted. The structure 
in the mosquito is clearly that of a very general plan in insects. 
The cerebral lobes (Fig. 75 (2-4)). The two lateral halves of the supra-oesophageal ganglion 
may conveniently be termed the cerebral lobes and it is convenient in the present case to 
include in this term the antenna1 and tritocerebral lobes. It will simplify description of 
these structures, which practically constitute the brain, to note very briefly what has been 
recorded in the literature regarding the brain in other insects. 
Outstanding among named structures are the corporapedunculata or ‘mushroom bodies ‘. 
These are normally large and conspicuous structures. They consist in each hemisphere of 
one, or often two, masses of so-called globuli cells embedded in, or underlying, the cortical 
layer of the dorsal aspect of the brain and very often forming elevations on the sur- 
face. There may be cup-shaped fibrous structures, calices, underlying the globuli masses. 
From each globuli mass a thick fibrous tract, root, stalk or pedunculus, passes into the 
neuropile mass of the lobe. There is commonly an elbow-shaped median root (Balken) 
directed inwards beneath the central body where those of the two sides nearly meet and a 
posterior root, cauliculus or recurrent root, which extends posteriorly and dorsally anterior 
to the central body. The central body (corpus centrule) is a conspicuous, somewhat segre- 
gated portion of the neuropile occupying a central position between the two cerebral lobes. 
It is described and figured in the blow-fly by Lowne, who gives the name nod&s to a 
spherical body connected to the hilum of the corpus centrale by a slender median cord. 
Other structures named are thepons cerebralis or bridge, thepars intercerebralis, the corpora 
Figure 76. The nervous system: the brain. 
Camera lucida drawing of sagittal section through cerebral lobe at level of entry of antenna1 
nerve (section no. 38 of series of 10 r_~ sections). 
The same at level of fronto-labral nerve (section no. 42 of the series). 
Coronal section through dorsal portion of brain (about level of plane through D to ~1.2 in 
Fig. no. 1; section no. 56 of the series). 
The same about level of from D’ to G in Fig. no. 2 (section no. 58 of the series). 
Transverse section at level of central body (section no. 81 of the series). 
The same through posterior part of the brain (section no. 88 of the series). 
A, central body as seen in transverse section no. 80 of same series ; B, the same at section no. 8 1; 
c, reconstruction as seen in lateral view; D, the same from ventral aspect. 
For lettering see explanation of Fig. 75. 
630 
I 01 mm. I 
B I 005 mm. 1 
Figure 76 C D 
7 
631 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
ventralia and the corpora optica. The pons cerebralis is situated in the upper and posterior 
part of the conjoined lobes. It is transversely elongated, horse-shoe shaped or dumb-bell 
shaped with the concavity downwards or forwards. The pars intercerebralis is that part of 
the brain where the two lobes form a common portion. It is usually described as that 
portion situated between the corpora pedunculata of the two sides. The corpora ventralia 
(Lebenlappen) are given by Snodgrass as situated in the ventro-lateral parts of the brain 
just above the antenna1 glomeruli of the deutocerebrum (this, depending on the view taken 
of the orientation of the head, might be posterior to the antenna1 glomeruli). They are 
regarded by some authors as belonging to the deutocerebrum. They are stated to be united 
by a transverse commissural tract that passes beneath the central body and the median roots 
of the corpora pedunculata. The corpora optica are chiefly present in the Apterygota. They 
lie dorsal to the pons. 
Certain neuropile masses and tracts are also recognised. In the antenna1 lobes are the 
antennal neuropile centres. These are large globular masses of neuropile characterised by 
their lobulated appearance. Protocerebral lobe is a term applied by Jonescu to the neuro- 
pile mass lying internal to the optic tract, seemingly neuropile mass 6 as described by me in 
the mosquito. Of commissural tracts may be mentioned (1) the commissure linking the 
antenna1 neuropile centres, usually shown as passing above the oesophagus; (2) the trito- 
cerebral commissure, sometimes a separate nerve trunk passing beneath the stomodaeum, 
but may be included in the crura ; (3) the ports already alluded to ; (4) commissures linking 
various parts of the cerebral lobes across the middle line. 
It will be clear how difficult it would be to fix precisely some of these structures where 
they are not typically developed. It is certainly difficult to be sure of the homology with 
the above of many parts of the mosquito brain. In the mosquito AL;des aegypti there are 
no large and unmistakable corpora pedunculata. Some tracts may represent these but 
how far they may do so must be for the present left uncertain. The central body is well 
represented. The pars intercerebralis must be of small extent since the cerebral lobes are 
divided by a deep median fissure. The bridge or pons may be the structure described later 
as the suboccipital commissure, but it is difficult to describe its position in the mosquito as 
dorsal. It seems, therefore, desirable to describe first what has been ascertained of the 
structure of the cerebral lobes in the mosquito, leaving the question of homology and 
nomenclature of the parts for subsequent consideration. 
The cortical layer of the cerebral lobes (Figs. 75 (2), (3); 76 (l), (2)). A cortical layer of 
small association neurocytes covers the greater part of the surface of the cerebral lobes. It 
varies, however, in thickness and certain areas of the cortex can be distinguished as more or 
less distinct and such may even in places be separated by breaks in continuity of the layer. 
Two such lines of break occur on the dorsal surface and may be termed the anterior and 
posterior fissures respectively. By such and other structural features the following areas of 
cortical layer may be distinguished. 
(1) The cortical layer of the antenna1 lobes. On each side this forms a fairly thick layer 
around the entering antenna1 nerves and the antenna1 neuropile centre (Fig. 76 (l), (2), (5)). 
(2) A thick mass of cortical layer is situated posterior* to the antenna1 neuropile centres. 
It extends backwards to the anterior fissure. Internally it is continuous with the cortical 
* References to orientation regard the head as extended, the frons dorsal to the labium and posterior to the 
clypeus. This is the usual method adopted by authors, but in some cases (for example, in the cockroach) the head 
has been regarded as oriented with the occiput dorsal. 
632 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
layer bordering the median fissure and externally meets the cortical layer of the medullary 
masses of the optic tracts. It may be called the postantennal cortical area (Fig. 75 (2) C). 
(3) A portion of cortical layer lying between the two fissures. It may be termed the 
dorsal cortical area (Fig. 75 (2) 0). 
(4) A particularly thick and massive portion of cortical layer occupying the occipital 
region, occipital area (Fig. 75 (2) F). A portion of this area consists of darker staining and 
more compact tissue resembling the cortical layer of the medullary masses of the optic 
tracts (Fig. 75 (3); 76 (1) F’). 
(5) A portion of cortical layer bordering the median fissure, notable as containing 
clusters of large neurocytes, median cortical area (Fig. 75 (2) E). 
Of a different character to the above there is, on the posterior portion of the dorsal 
surface of each cerebral lobe, a small mass of dark-staining cells situated beneath the 
general level of the cortical layer and partly exposed in the posterior fissure (Fig. 75 (2) D’). 
Ventrally the cellular cortical layer is absent or very thin over a considerable area. This 
bare area in part forms the roof of the passage occupied by the oesophagus and in part lies 
upon the more anterior bundles of the lateral dilators of the oesophageal pump where these 
pass in to their insertion (Fig. 75 (3)). 
Neuropile masses of the cerebral lobes (Figs. 75 ; 76 (1-15)). In the central neuropile mass 
certain portions (here termed masses) can be distinguished. These are as numbered in the 
figures and text: 
l-3. Neuropile masses of the optic lobes. See under ‘ Optic lobes ‘, p. 629. 
4. A considerable mass formed by the entering antenna1 nerve as distinct from that portion 
passing to the antenna1 centre (Fig. 76 (l), (4)). 
5. The antenna1 neuropile centres. These are the most distinct and outstanding of all the 
neuropile masses in the cerebral lobes. They are approximately globular in shape and consist of 
a number of lobules giving them a characteristic appearance as noted in a number of other 
insects (Fig. 75 (2); 76 (l-3), (5)). 
6. A considerable mass forming a lobe situated external to the antenna1 neuropile centre and 
just internal to the internal medullary mass of the optic lobe of its side from which it receives fibres. 
7. A neuropile mass situated internal to 6 and posterior to the antenna1 centre. 
8. A peculiar small isolated neuropile mass on the dorsal aspect of each cerebral lobe and 
partly exposed in the anterior fissure of the cortex. It is peculiar as receiving a small but distinct 
tract which passes up the side of the cerebral lobe from the most ventral part of the internal 
medullary mass (Fig. 76 (5) d). Though it usually appears in sections as an isolated mass, it is 
a projecting spur from the antero-external portion of neuropile mass 10, that is, that portion shown 
pointing upwards in Fig. 76 (1). 
9. Another small isolated neuropile mass situated in or near the posterior fissure. It is 
situated near the cortical mass D’ though not directly below it. From it an important tract (tract c) 
passes forwards as described later. 
10. A large neuropile mass situated dorsally and posteriorly. It shows indications of consisting 
of an inner posterior and an outer anterior portion. It forms a large part of the cerebral neuropile 
mass and receives fibres from the optic lobes. Numerous loosely arranged commissural fibres pass 
between the masses of the two sides. 
11. A small but distinct and rather isolated neuropile mass situated posterior and ventral to 10. 
It lies beneath the occipital cortical area and receives fibres from it, especially from the dark- 
staining portion of the occipital cortical area (F’). 
12. A conspicuous bar-shaped mass of neuropile situated posterior and ventral to the cerebral 
lobes across the median line. It appears to be of commissural nature and possibly connects the 
two occipital cortical areas. It has characters that suggest it might be the pons. It is provisionally 
named the suboccipital commissure (Fig. 75 (2), (3), (12)). 
633 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
13. The central body. This is a mass of neuropile situated in the centre of the ganglion and 
forming a part of the connection between the cerebral lobes constituted by the cerebral com- 
missure. It is to a considerable extent isolated from surrounding neuropile by clefts and the 
presence of small nuclei which appear to be those of neurilemma or neuroglia type cells. It 
consists of a larger mass partially enfolding a smaller mass, both of which extend dorsally in 
blunt papilla-like processes. There is also a forked rod-shaped structure and some smaller acces- 
sory masses. Its appearance in sections depends a good deal on the angle at which the brain has 
been cut. A reconstruction of the part is shown in the figure (Fig. 76 (7) C, 0). 
14. There are considerable masses of neuropile situated ventrally which are difficult to delimit 
and which are closely connected with, if not part of, the crura. They include on each side a con- 
siderable neuropile mass formed by the passage backwards within the brain of a large portion of 
the antenna1 nerves. The two neuropile masses 7 are also here united by a commissural tract 
linking the two. Here also on each side is the neuropile mass giving origin to the fronto-labral 
nerve and linked across the median line by the tritocerebral commissure. 
Neuropile tracts of the cerebral lobes. In material stained by silver impregnation stained 
axons traverse the neuropile in almost every direction making an assessment of connection 
between different parts of the mass difficult. Certain aggregations of fibres, however, 
constitute characteristic tracts. The more conspicuous of these, given under the respective 
letters by which they are indicated in the figures and referred to in the text are: 
Tract a. This is a thick compact tract passing from the posterior part of the postantennal 
cortical area to neuropile mass 11. It passes some distance lateral to the central body and ends 
in the neuropile mass 11 and its neighbourhood. It links the postantennal cortical area with the 
occipital cortex, especially the dark-stained area F’, which also sends fibres to the neuropile mass 11 
(Fig. 76 (1) a). 
Tract b. This is a similarly long and conspicuous tract passing from the antenna1 neuropile 
centre on each side to the occipital region and the same neuropile mass 11 or its neighbourhood 
(Fig. 76 (2) b). 
Tract c. This is a short but thick tract passing forwards from the neuropile mass 9 to near the 
origin of tract a (Fig. 76 (3)). It is the only main tract that has any relation to the glomeruli-like 
cortical mass D’ and this is only a somewhat indirect one as the cortical mass D’ appears more 
related to the neuropile lobe 10 than to the small mass 9 though the masses are somewhat near 
each other (Fig. 76 (2)). 
Tract d. This is the narrow but distinct tract passing from the' ventral part of the internal 
medullary mass up the side of the cerebral lobe to the small neuropile mass 8 (Fig. 76 (5)). 
Tract e. Small tracts on each side of the median fissure passing from the anterior group of 
large neurocytes on the sides of the median fissure backwards on each side of the fissure to the 
inner portions of the neuropile mass 10 (Fig. 76 (4) e). 
Mention should also be made of commissural tracts. A commissural tract crosses in 
front of the central body linking the two neuropile masses 7 (Fig. 75 (4), 15). Numerous 
fibres also pass between the neuropile masses 10, mainly posterior to the central body. 
A connecting portion of neuropile between the two bodies 10 forms the roof of the cerebral 
commissure lying over the central body (Fig. 75 (4), 16). This does not, however, consist 
of transverse fibres but of fibres passing down into the crura. A commissural tract linking 
the two antenna1 neuropile masses is commonly present in insect brains. In the mosquito 
the deep median fissure makes any such tract difficult to follow, but tracts seem to pass 
down from these masses into the crura. 
Homology of the cerebral lobe structures. Interest in this respect relates chiefly to the 
question how far the structures in the mosquito brain show the presence of the corpora 
pedunculata. In the tracts described there is a suggestion that the characteristic mushroom 
bodies of the insect brain may be represented if only in a modified and imperfect form. It is 
634 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
difficult, however, to put such a suggestion into any concrete conclusion. In the absence of 
typical corporapedunculata there is a danger that almost any tracts might be fitted into the 
standard scheme. The findings have a general resemblance to those found by Buxton in 
Micropteryx and the mosquito brain would seem to be of primitive type. Further informa- 
tion on the brain of other Nematocera would be very desirable. The large size of the optic 
lobes would seem to be a feature in keeping with the enormous size of the compound eyes 
and the large tracts linking the antenna1 neuropile centres and antenna1 nerve tracts with 
the rest of the brain would seem to point to the importance of the antenna1 sensory 
mechanism in A&des aegypti. 
The sub-oesophageal ganglion (Figs. 75 (4); 78 (3)). This is a club-shaped structure, swollen 
anteriorly and narrowing as it passes backwards to divide into the two long connectives 
linking it through the neck with the prothoracic ganglion. It is a composite ganglion com- 
prising a number of fused ganglia of the anterior portion of the ventral nerve cord. From 
it normally issue the mandibular, maxillary and labial nerves. It consists of a neuropile 
mass which is exposed dorsally where it forms the floor of the canal in which the oeso- 
phagus lies and is surrounded ventrally and laterally by cortical substance containing both 
association and motor neurone cells. 
Nerves pass out through the cortical layer from neuropile masses situated in the ventral 
portion of the ganglion, the respective neuropile masses being linked across the median 
line by transverse tracts. The more dorsal portion of the ganglion is largely occupied by 
fibres passing in from the brain through the crura. Anteriorly on each side is the neuropile 
mass from which the fronto-labral nerve arises (tritocerebral lobes). Whether there is a 
mandibular nerve is a little doubtful, but appearances suggest that this may be a very small 
nerve passing out a little ventral to the fronto-labral nerve or a branch of the labral nerve 
representing this (see note 4 following list of peripheral nerves, p. 642). Ventral to the 
frontolabral nerves are the maxillary nerves and still more ventral and posterior and 
closer to the median line there are the large labial nerves (Fig. 78 (3)). 
Posterior to the points of issue of the labial nerves the cortical layer contains four groups 
of large neurocytes, one on each side of the middle line some distance behind the point of 
exit of the labial nerves and another pair behind these. 
THE VENTRAL NERVE CORD 
The ventral nerve cord consists of the sub-oesophageal ganglion (described above), the long 
double connectives passing through the neck, the fused ganglia of the three thoracic 
segments, the ganglion of the first abdominal segment now fused with the ganglia of the 
thoracic segments and the six ganglia of abdominal segments II-VII with their double 
connectives (Fig. 76 (1)). 
The three large thoracic ganglia are situated ventrally in the thorax above the sternites 
and at about the level of the upper part of the coxae. They occupy the space in the median 
line between the lower ends of the dorso-ventral indirect wing muscles of the two sides 
and below the fore part of the mid-gut and proventriculus, but separated from these by the 
ventral diverticulum and the lobe of visceral fat-body in which lie the salivary glands and 
the ventral nephrocytes. 
The conjoined ganglia form a roughly cylindrical mass in which, however, the component 
ganglia are still evident (Fig. 76 (1)). This is especially so in the case of the metathoracic 
635 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
ganglion which is sharply divided off by a constriction where the conjoined ganglia pass 
through the stirrup-shaped opening between the arms of the mesofurca (Fig. 76 (1) mf). 
The three ganglia are approximately equal in size in spite of the fact that the greater 
part of the thorax is mesothoracic. The small ganglion of the first abdominal segment is 
attached to the posterior and upper part of the metathoracic ganglion, rather like a stumpy 
dog’s tail and from it the connectives are continued into the abdomen. 
The neuropile of the conjoined ganglia is continuous medianly and dorsally. Laterally 
and ventrally it is in the form of distinct lobes which project ventrally and from the apices 
of which pass out the six large nerves to the respective legs. The cortical layer is thin and 
largely deficient dorsally, but thick ventrally and laterally where it occupies space left 
between the neuropile masses (Fig. 77 (3), (4)). Th e neuropile of the small first abdominal 
ganglion is in the form of two lateral masses as in the ganglia of the other abdominal 
segments, but basally these are continuous with the neuropile of the metathoracic ganglion. 
In material stained by silver impregnation methods the continuous dorsal portion of 
neuropile is seen to be traversed by numerous long axon fibres continued from the anterior 
connectives and passing various distances through the ganglion before terminating in the 
neuropile, some extending its whole length. These fibres mainly form tracts towards each 
side of the ganglion, one dorsal along its upper surface and a parallel tract that early 
separates and passes more ventrally at about the level of the bases of the conical neuropile 
masses (Fig. 77 (3) a, b). 
The neuropile is seen to consist mainly of a confused mass of fine branching fibres with 
occasional thicker fibres, some of which form lines or tracts passing to issuing nerves, 
whilst others are seen passing into the neuropile from parts of the cortical layer. Fibres 
forming small commissural tracts are also present, one of which in the mesothoracic ganglion 
is particularly noticeable. The cortical layer is mainly formed of small association type 
neurocytes, but occasional larger cells are present being most noticeable in the meso- 
thoracic ganglion especially posterior to the mesothoracic neuropile in the ventral portion 
of the cortical layer (Fig. 77 (6)). 
Nerves issuing from the ganglion for the most part appear to take origin from the neuro- 
pile. The large nerves to the legs arise from the apices of the six conical neuropile masses. 
Next in importance in respect to size are the two nerves to the halteres arising from the 
lateral dorsal aspects of the metathoracic ganglion just posterior to the mesofurca. Their 
origin is peculiar in showing a conspicuous fan-shaped aggregation of what appear to be 
axon fibres coming largely from the dorsal axon tracts previously noted and which appear 
to terminate largely in these nerves. From the antero-lateral face of the prothoracic ganglion 
three rather small nerves pass to the sternal and other prothoracic regions. In addition 
to the large leg nerves a smaller nerve in the meso- and metathorax arises along with or 
near these and passes backwards into the posterior part of the coxae. Apart from the nerves 
to the halteres the only nerves of any size arising from the ganglionic complex dorsally are 
a group of moderate-sized nerves arising laterally from the upper part of the mesothoracic 
ganglion. On each side these are three in number, one arising anteriorly apparently from 
the anterior face of the neuropile mass at some depth (Fig. 77 (1) b ; (5) a) and two rising 
together in a mid antero-posterior position from the dorsal part of the neuropile mass (Fig. 
77 (1) c, d; (5) b, c). The more anterior of these latter two passes forwards and links up 
with, or accompanies, the first-mentioned nerve as described later, whilst the more posterior 
one passes backwards and upwards anterior to the projecting cups of the mesofurca. 
636 
6 , @05mm. 
L 
Figure 77. The ventral nerve cord. 
Dorsal view of thoracic ganglia. a, prothoracic nerves; b, c, d, nerves arising dorsally from 
the mesothoracic ganglion; e, nerve to haltere; f, nerve to hind-leg. 
Ganglion of an abdominal segment. 
Sagittal section of thoracic ganglia towards lateral margin showing axon tracts. a, dorsal 
tract of side; b, ventral tract of side; c, position a little internal to where the nerve to the 
haltere takes off. 
Sagittal section of thoracic ganglia passing through the lateral neuropile masses at level of 
origin of nerves to the legs. a, b, c, prothoracic, mesothoracic and metathoracic neuropile 
masses; d, dorsal continuous layer of neuropile; e, neuropile mass of lateral half of ganglion 
of the first abdominal segment. 
Sagittal section of thoracic ganglia at level of origin of dorsal nerves. a, b, c, nerves corre- 
sponding to those labelled b, c, d in no. 1 of plate. 
Portion of sagittal section showing cortical layer posterior to the mesothoracic neuropile 
mass at level of group of large pyriform neurocytes. 
Lettering : cl, cortical layer ; con., ganglionic connectives ; con.g, connectives from sub-oesophageal 
ganglion entering the prothoracic ganglion; ha.n, nerve to haltere; mf, mesofurca; MSg, meso- 
thoracic ganglion; MTg, metathoracic ganglion; n, nerve issuing from lateral angle of ganglion; 
n.Z,, n.Z,, n.Z,, nerve to first, second and third leg respectively; np, neuropile; PTg, prothoracic 
ganglion. 
637 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
The abdominal ganglia are much smaller than those of the thorax. That of the first 
segment is attached in the imago, as already noted, to the thoracic complex. The remaining 
ganglia lie close to the sternites in the anterior portion of their respective segments. Each 
ganglion is diamond-shaped and consists of two oval neuropile masses partially fused in 
the middle line and a cortical layer of small neurocytes. The cortical layer, as in the thoracic 
ganglia, is thickest ventrally and laterally and but slightly developed dorsally. A single 
nerve on each side takes origin from the lateral angle of the ganglion. Linking the ganglia 
are double connectives; those linking the ganglion of the first with that of the second 
segment are somewhat longer than the others, but otherwise the distances between the 
ganglia are not very different. The ganglia also are of approximately equal size, except that 
the ganglion of the seventh segment is somewhat larger than those in the segments immedi- 
ately preceding and in both sexes shows a constriction marking off an anterior and a 
posterior portion and suggesting that the ganglion represents a fused seventh and eighth 
abdominal ganglion. 
For intimate structure of the insect ventral cord ganglia see Binet (1894), on the ventral 
cord in insects and Zawarzin (1924) on the intimate structure of the cord ganglia in 
Aeschna. The abdominal ganglia in Agdes aegypti are, however, small and appear to be of 
relatively simple construction. 
There does not appear to be in the imago any median nerve system such as is present in 
the larva. In this connection may be mentioned the delicate membrane that has previously 
been described (see section on accessory pulsatile structures in ch. XXVII, p. 619) as overlying 
the ventral nerve cord. In sagittal sections this appears as a line of tissue with small 
nuclei spaced at regular intervals lying just above the cord and at first sight might suggest 
a median nerve system. Traced laterally, however, its membranous nature is apparent. 
THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
More study is necessary before a full and adequate account can be given of the peripheral 
nerves and their distribution. This is the more so since there seem relatively few anatomical 
studies of the peripheral nerves and their distribution in insects other than those of a very 
general character. Among authors who have described the nervous system including the 
peripheral nerves are : Holste (19 lo), on the nervous system of Dytiscus; Hammar (1908), 
on the nervous system of the larva of Corydalis; Hanstriim (1928 a, b), on the nervous system 
in arthropods ; Rogosina (1928), on segmental nerves in Aeschna. Though the muscles of 
the head of the mosquito have been minutely described by several authors, the nerves have 
received no attention. Jobling (1928), in his study of the head and mouth-parts in Culicoides, 
gives figures in which the mandibular, maxillary and labial nerves are shown, but does not 
describe these or give their origin or distribution. The following list of nerves of the imago 
of Ai;des aegypti must be considered provisional and may require modification and 
addition. The notes to which reference is made follow on the list, p. 642. For nerves of the 
stomodaeal system see section on the retrocerebral complex. 
List of peripheral nerves 
Head 
Optic nerve and nerve to lateral ocellus (see under ‘Special sense organs’, p. 648). 
(Nerves to dorsal ocelli: not represented, see note 1, p. 642). 
Antenna1 nerve (see note 2). 
638 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
Tegumentary nerve (see note 3). 
Nerves of the stomatogastric system (see under ‘ Retrocerebral complex’, p. 643). 
Fronto-labral nerve. A short stout nerve on each side arising from the neuropile of the trito- 
cerebral lobe, but issuing antero-laterally from the sub-oesophageal ganglion. Divides almost at 
once into: 
Frontal ganglion connective. A short stout nerve passing up in front of the lateral flange of 
the buccal cavity to join the side of the frontal ganglion (Fig. 78 (4)). 
Labral nerve. Passes forwards and dorsally past the side of the buccal cavity into the lower part 
of the clypeal dome supplying branches to muscles and ending at a group of cells on each side in 
the region of the anterior hard palate (Fig. 78 (4) n. 3”). 
Near its origin it gives off a branch passing forwards along the side of, and somewhat ventral to, 
the buccal cavity (see note 4). The muscles in the upper part of the dome are mostly supplied by 
the frontal nerve of the stomodaeal system as shown in Fig. 78 (4). 
Mandibular nerve (see note 4). 
Maxillary nerve. A relatively large nerve arising from the lateral anterior aspect of the sub- 
oesophageal ganglion. It passes forwards and outwards dorsal to the ventral cephalic trachea, 
giving off branches to maxillary muscles and ending as a well-marked nerve entering and con- 
tinuing along the maxillary palp (Fig. 78 (2), (4) n. 6). 
Labial nerve. The largest of the nerves arising from the sub-oesophageal ganglion. Arises 
ventrally on each, side of the middle line some little distance back from the anterior end of the 
ganglion and passes forwards ventral to the ventral cephalic trachea to enter and continue along 
the labium to the labella forming with the nerve of the opposite side the characteristic twin nerves 
of the labium (Fig. 78 (3), (4) n. 7). 
Prothoracic ganglion 
Nerve arising just external to the entry of the anterior connectives and passing forwards to the 
neck. 
Nerve arising with the next tabulated nerve a short distance posterior to the above and passing 
to the prosternal and propleural regions. 
Nerve arising along with the above and passing into the first coxa accompanying the trachea 
to the first leg. 
Nerve to the fore-leg. A large nerve arising ventrally from the apex of the lateral lobe of the 
prothoracic ganglion and passing down the posterior part of the fore coxa and beyond (Fig. 77 
(4) nl. 1). 
Meso thoracic ganglion 
Anterior mesothoracic. Arises on each side laterally and dorsally from the fore part of the 
mesothoracic ganglion and passes forwards after linking with the next tabulated nerve in front of 
the anterior indirect wing muscle to the region of the anterior spiracle and the large tracheae in 
that region (Figs. 77 (5); 78 (1) b). 
Middle mesothoracic. Arises posterior to the above from about the middle of the outer border 
of the ganglion along with the next tabulated nerve, but leaves this to pass forwards to accompany, 
or fuse with, the anterior mesothoracic nerve (Figs. 77 (5) ; 78 (1) c). 
Posterior mesothoracic. Arises in common with the previous nerve and passes posteriorly and 
dorsally anterior to the furcal cup and to the general region of the wing root (Figs. 77 (5) ; 78 (1) d>. 
Nerve to the middle leg. A large nerve arising ventrally from the apex of the lateral lobe of the 
mesothoracic ganglion and passing down the coxa to the trochanter and beyond (Fig. 77 (4) rd. 2). 
Posterior coxal nerve of the mid-leg. A nerve taking origin from the apex of the lateral lobe 
just posterior to the main nerve to the leg and passing into the posterior part of the coxa. 
Me ta thoracic ganglion 
Nerve to the haltere. A very large nerve arising on each side dorsally and laterally from the 
fore part of the ganglion just posterior to the stem of the mesofurca and passing posterior to the 
cup of that structure directly to the base of the haltere (see note 6). 
639 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
Nerve to the hind-leg. A large nerve arising from the apex of the lateral lobe of the meta- 
thoracic ganglion and passing somewhat backwards and ventrally into the coxa and beyond. 
Posterior coxal nerve of the hind-leg. Arises from the apex of the lateral lobe just posterior to 
the above and passes into the posterior part of the hind coxa. 
First abdominal segment 
Segmental lateral nerve. A small nerve arising on each side from the connective behind the 
ganglion and passing into the first abdominal segment to become the lateral nerve of that segment. 
Abdominal segments II- VI 
Segmental lateral nerves of the segments. From each side of each ganglion a nerve takes origin, 
passing at first outwards external to the segmental muscles and then up the side of the segment 
just internal to the parietal fat-body. In each segment it accompanies the ventral tracheal branch 
of the segment. 
Abdominal segment VII in the female 
Segmental lateral nerve. A nerve on each side takes origin from the anterior portion of the 
ganglion and passes outwards to the side of the segment as in other segments giving off branches 
near its origin to the fore and hind parts of the segment. The nerve and its branches pass ventral 
to the oviducts (Fig. 78 (5) a). 
Postero-ventral nerve. On each side a nerve arises from the posterior pointed extremity of the 
ganglion and passes to the lateral parts of the eighth segment ventrally (Fig. 78 (5) b). 
Postero-dorsal nerve. Arising along with the above but passing more medianly and dorsally 
this nerve passes through the terminal segments subjacent to the rectum and behind the common 
oviduct and spermathecae and sends a branch into the cercus of its side (Fig. 78 (5) c). 
Abdominal segment VII in the male (Fig. 78 (6)) 
Segmental lateral nerve. A small nerve passing up the side of segment VII. 
Posterior nerve. A rather large nerve arising on each side from the posterior end of each 
lateral half of the ganglion and passing backwards at the sides of the median genital ducts. It 
gives off a branch from which a nerve passes up the side of segment VIII and continues through 
this segment eventually to enter the gonocoxite of its side. It supplies the muscles connected with 
this structure and sends some fine branches to the parts connected with the median copulatory 
structures (Fig. 78 (6)). 
Figure 78. Peripheral nerves. 
General view of the ventral cord and its nerves. a, prothoracic nerves; b, c, d, dorsal nerves of 
mesothoracic ganglion; e, nerve to the halteres. 
Dorsal view of clypeus, showing frontal and labral nerves and course of maxillary nerves 
(dotted). 
Ventral view of sub-oesophageal ganglion, showing position of issuing nerves and other features. 
a, commissural tracts linking neuropile masses from which nerves take origin; b, collections of 
large neurocytes. 
Lateral view of clypeus, showing frontal, labral, maxillary and labial nerves. 
Dorsal view of terminal segments of female, showing the terminal ganglion and its nerves. 
a, lateral nerves of seventh abdominal segment ; b, ventral posterior nerve ; c, dorsal posterior 
nerve. 
Lateral view of terminal segments of male, showing the terminal ganglion and its nerves. 
Lettering : ac.g, accessory glands ; cod, common oviduct ; fg, frontal ganglion ; fn, frontal nerve ; 
Gc, gonocoxite; g. 2, sub-oesophageal ganglion; g. II, g. VII, ganglia of second and seventh 
segment; m. 41, m. 42, indirect wing muscles ; m. 63, muscle to first leg; mxp, maxillary palps; 
n. 3, n. 3’, n. 3”, frontal-labral, frontal and labral nerves; n. 6, maxillary nerve; n. 7, labial nerve; 
Ph, phallosome ; Rc, rectum; m, recurrent nerve ; vd, fused vasa deferentia; VII, VIII, IX, 
abdominal segments. 
640 
I* a,: 
V 
I 1Q mm. 
, 1; . \, ,’ -_’ . ..’ , 02mm. _-I n. 6 , .’ 
-b 
, Olmm. , 
. . . . :... :. 
/y---y_/ * .: ‘. L . ,.,. , .y :: .‘* . , . 
*.. _* 
I @2mm. , 
41 Figure 78 
641 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
Note 1. The structure figured by Thompson (1905) as a nerve passing from the cerebral 
lobe to the dorsal ocellus (frontal pulsatile organ) is clearly not nerve but muscle fibres 
passing from the aorta to that organ. 
Note 2. The major portion of the antenna1 nerve which is very massive terminates in 
Johnston’s organ. A separate strand is, however, distinguishable as a small nerve passing 
on into the antenna1 filament. 
Note 3. A small nerve can be made out in some preparations taking origin from the 
posterior part of the occipital lobe of the brain just internal to where the dorsal cephalic 
trachea enters the groove between the optic and cerebral lobes. It appears to send a 
branch forwards and ventrally over the lateral dilator muscles of the pump and one passing 
backwards. It may be the tegumentary nerve or possibly connected with the retrocerebral 
system. 
Note 4. In keeping with the obsolescent character of the mandible in Agdes aegypti a 
mandibular nerve, if present, is small. A small nerve bundle which may represent it 
passes out from the ganglion a little ventral to the fronto-labral nerve. Or a larger nerve 
that branches from the fronto-labral nerve and passes forwards to the general region of the 
tiny mandibular muscle may function as the mandibular nerve. At the point of issue of the 
above nerves there are crossing fibres forming a small plexus. It has been noted in the 
larva that there is a plexus connected with the nerves to the mouth structures and an 
accessory mandibular nerve. 
Note 5. There are some points of interest in respect to the thoracic nerves which deserve 
comment. In the first place the contrast between the large nerves to the legs and the 
relatively insignificant nerves which presumably are to serve the far greater volume of 
muscle indirectly connected with the wings suggests something peculiar about the in- 
nervation of the latter. The indirect wing muscles it may be recalled differ from the leg 
muscles not only in their histological structure, but in that they are considered to be of the 
nature of giant fibres, that is, each bundle on such a view is a single fibre enormously 
greater than the fibres making up most other muscles of the body. Another peculiar 
feature is that the small nerves that one might expect to be concerned in innervation of these 
great muscular masses do not mainly proceed to them but seem, so to speak, to by-pass 
them. Thus the anterior dorsal mesothoracic nerve is mainly traceable as proceeding to the 
region of the anterior spiracle and the mass of large tracheal trunks in this region. A dis- 
cussion on the innervation of muscles cannot here be entered upon, but attention may be 
drawn to the interesting and stimulating paper by Hoyle (1955) on this subject; see also 
Tiegs (1955). 
Note 6. Mention has already been made of the large size of the nerves to the halteres. 
I have not seen any reference to the size of these nerves in other Diptera or to the unusual 
nature of their relations to the axon tracts in the ganglion. It suggests the importance of 
these organs in connection with the more anterior parts of the nervous system in the 
mosquito. Visual, antenna1 and haltere senses seem to be dominating features in the 
nervous system of this actively flying insect. 
A description of the peripheral nervous system would be incomplete without some 
mention of the terminations of the nerves. Such may be in the subcuticular nervous 
system, in muscle-fibre endings, in the alimentary canal and other viscera and in special 
endings in sense organs. The last mentioned will be dealt with in a subsequent section. 
In regard to other methods of termination, only a very brief reference need be made. The 
642 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
subcuticular sensory system, apart from ectodermal sense organs such as sensitive hairs, 
sensory pits, etc., described later, is usually seen most developed in soft-skinned larval 
forms. It consists of a subcuticular network of multipolar neurocytes and their branches. 
So far as known no observations have been made on any such system in the imaginal 
mosquito where sensitive hairs and sensory pits may be expected mainly to form the 
cuticular sensory system. For li terature see Snodgrass (1926,1935), and references there given. 
The ending of nerves in insect muscle are most usually by branching of the nerve fibres 
surrounding or penetrating the muscle fibres or by a form of motor end-plate, ‘Doyere’s 
cones’, which are according to Marcu (1929) points where the fibres penetrate the muscle 
fibre as a brush-like group of branches. Claw-like endings of nerve fibres on muscle 
fibres are described by Hoyle (1955). No observations appear to have been made on the 
imaginal mosquito. 
The termination of nerves to the alimentary canal in different insects has been studied by 
Zawarzin (19 16) ; Orlov (1924) ; Rogosina (1928). 
(f) THE RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
The stomodaeal, stomatogastric, sympathetic or visceral nervous system is intimately 
associated with certain endocrine glands having important functions in growth and meta- 
morphosis. The two elements combined form what Cazal (1948) has termed the retro- 
cerebral complex. This dual system has already been described with references to the 
literature in the chapters dealing with larval structure where it is both more developed and 
more easily studied than in the imago. It will here, therefore, only be necessary to note 
what changes have taken place in passage to the imago and any special features that may 
require mention in this stage. 
The stomatogastric nervous system in the strict sense, that is the frontal ganglion with its 
connectives, recurrent nerve and the terminal ending of the recurrent nerve in a hypo- 
cerebral ganglion show little essential change. The frontal ganglion is still readily identifi- 
able forming a most useful landmark in assigning homologies under the greatly changed 
conditions that have taken place during metamorphosis in the pharynx and oesophagus and 
accessory structures. The recurrent nerve has the same essential relations passing back in 
the middle line. But in place of the soft muscular pharynx and oesophagus on which it lay 
in the larva it now lies deeply enclosed in what is almost a closed canal formed by the 
deeply folded heavily sclerotised dorsal plate of the oesophageal pump. It is still accom- 
panied by, and underlies, the aorta which is here greatly narrowed. Just before the 
posterior end of the plate the recurrent nerve ends abruptly in a not very large group of 
cells forming a flattened ganglion lying beneath, and seemingly in continuity with, the floor 
of the aorta. From this ganglion, which resembles in position the hypocerebral ganglion 
of the larva, certain nerves pass backwards. What these are may for the moment be left 
unspecified pending discussion of the glandular elements of the complex. 
The component glands of the complex have already been indicated when describing the 
complex in the larva. They consist of the corpora allata and the mass of cells in which these 
bodies, more especially in the larva, lie embedded, the two components together forming 
the corpora allata complex of Bodenstein (1945). As Bodenstein notes, the corpora allata 
are still present unchanged in the imago. The surrounding element of the complex, which 
in the larva would appear to be the peritracheal gland of Possompes (1948, 1953) 
643 41-2 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
(prothoracic gland of Williams, 1949, and other authors) is, however, no longer present in 
its original form and consists of a different type of cell and is without the special characters 
of this part of the complex in the larva. 
Cazal (1948) has described the retrocerebral complex in the pupa of Culex pipiens in 
which stage as he says it is most developed and most readily studied. In the posterior part 
of the neck lying by the side of the aorta there are two nerves, each with two roots, internal 
and external, which are fused at their point of emergence from the brain. These issue from 
the posterior aspect of the brain in the region of the root of the cerebral commissure and 
run parallel with the recurrent nerve. According to Cazal these pass to a group of cells 
‘D . * , 
L 0-02mm. , 6 OtX!mm. I I 3 
Figure 79. The retrocerebral complex. 
Corpus allatum of a newly emerged female showing the gland situated close up to the 
anterior commissural trachea and with little indication of any peritracheal gland tissue. 
The same in a newly emerged mosquito where the unchanged corpus allatum lies at a consider- 
able distance from the trachea with intervening apparently disorganised peritracheal gland 
tissue between. 
The corpora allata of a female (age uncertain) showing almost unchanged peritracheal glands. 
The complex in a male. 
The complex in a female mosquito that has had a blood feed and was ovipositing (age prob- 
ably about 7 days from emergence). The corpora allata are unchanged and the site of the 
larval peritracheal gland is occupied by what appear to be typical pericardial cells. 
The corpus allatum of the same more highly magnified. 
Two of the pericardial-like cells more highly magnified. 
644 
RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
incorporated in the hypocerebral ganglion that represent a single median corpus para- 
cardiacum (corpus cardiacum of Possompes). From the single corpus paracardiacum 
included in the hypocerebral ganglion in which the recurrent nerve ends there pass back 
on each side a nerve to the corpus allaturn and one to the oesophagus. At the level of the 
corpora allata the nerves and the aorta are crossed by a large tracheal vessel. In this region 
the trachea, with the corpora allata and the ends of the corpora allata nerves, is surrounded 
by a mass of cells which Cazal considers to be of the nature of pericardial cells. In the 
imago the pericardial cells disappear (see, however, later) so that the complex as a whole 
is much reduced. The anterior postcerebral gland of Possompes is also considered by 
Cazal to be a pericardial cell charged with waste products. 
- In the imago of A. aegypti the corpora allata with their characteristic appearance as 
small oval bodies with small regularly arranged nuclei have, as noted by Bodenstein in 
Anopheles, remained unchanged. But the regular compact appearance of the corpora aZZata 
complex in which these bodies in the larva lie embedded has been largely lost, the small oval 
corpora allata being no longer definitely included in a cellular mass but lying more or less 
free. The appearance of the complex was observed to vary a good deal in different specimens 
even of the same age. Shortly after emergence there was sometimes a distinct appearance 
of peritracheal gland still present (Fig. 79 (3)). In other cases the corpora allata were close 
up to the trachea with scarcely any associated tissue (Fig. 79 (1)). Very commonly the 
corpora allata were situated at some distance posterior to the trachea linked to this by 
what appeared to be disorganised tissue (Fig. 79 (2)). The corpora allata were also present 
unchanged in the male (Fig. 79 (4)). 
As the corpora allata seemed to be still in a condition to function it was thought of 
interest to note whether in mosquitoes that had lived some time, had had a blood meal and 
had oviposited, the corpora allata were still unchanged. In such mosquitoes the corpora 
allata were unchanged, but in place of the peritracheal glands or cells replacing these the 
space between the corpora allata and the trachea was occupied by clusters of large cells 
undistinguishable from pericardial cells (Fig. 79 (5-7)). Before this observation it had been 
difficult to appreciate Cazal’s reference to the pericardial cell nature of the peritracheal 
glands. It would appear, however, that with the passage to the imaginal state the outer 
portion of the corpora allata complex, representing the peritracheal gland, disorganises 
whilst some of its cells, or new cells, take on a typical nephrocyte condition. Lying, as the 
complexes do, close beside the aorta there would not seem anything impossible in these 
being pericardial cells. 
In the imago the nerve to the corpus allaturn of each side is much less conspicuous than 
in the larva and more difficult to follow to its termination. Two nerves, however, appear to 
continue from the hypocerebral ganglion on each side, one going to the neighbourhood 
of the corpora allata and one to the dilated portion of the oesophagus near the proventriculus. 
REFERENCES 
(e) THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
BALDUS, A. (1924). Untersuchungen i.iber Bau und Funktion des Gehirnes der Larve und Imago 
von Libellen. 2. wiss. Zool. 121, 557-620. 
BERGER, C. A. (1878). Untersuchungen iiber den Bau des Gehirns und der Retina der 
Arthropoden. Arb. Zool. Inst. Wien u. Trieste, 1, 173-220. 
645 
IMAGO: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND RETROCEREBRAL COMPLEX 
BINET, A. (1894). Contribution a l’etude du systeme nerveux sous-intestinal des insectes. J. Anat. 
Phys. 30, 449-580. 
B~TTGER, 0. (1910). Das Gehirn eines niederen Insekts, Lepisma saccharina. Jena 2. Nat. ZooZ. 
46, 80144. 
BRANDT, A. (1879). Vergleichend-anatom. Untersuchungen tiber das Nervensystem der Zwei- 
fliigler. Hor. Sot. Ent. Rossic. 15. 
BRETSCHNEIDER, F. (1913). Der Centralkiirper und die Pilzformigenkorper im Gehirn der 
Insekten. 2001. Anz. 41, 560-9. 
BRETSCHNEIDER, F. (1914). Uber die Gehirne des Goldkafers und des Lederlaufkafers. 2002. Anz. 
43, 490-7. 
BRETSCHNEIDER, F. (1916). Uber die Gehirne der Ktichenschabe und des Mehlkafers. Jena 2. 
Naturwiss. 52, 269-362. 
BRETSCHNEIDER, F. (1921). Uber das Gehirn des Wolfsmilchschwarmers DeiZephiZa euphorbiae. 
Jena 2. Naturwiss. 57,423-62. 
BRETSCHNEIDER, F. (1924a). Uber das Gehirn eines Barenspinners Callimorpha dominzda. Jena 
2. Naturwiss. 60, 147-73. 
BRETSCHNEIDER, F. (1924b). Uber die Gehirne des Eichenspinners und des Seidenspinners 
(Lasiocampa quercus L. and Bombyx mori L.). Jena Z. Naturwiss. 60, 563-78. 
BURGESS, A. F. (1880). Second Rep. U.S. Entom. Comm. 
BUXTON, P. A. (1917). On the protocerebrum of Micropteryx (Lepidoptera). Trans. Ent. Sot. 
Lond. 1917, 112-53. 
CAJAL S. R. (1918). Observaciones sobre la estrutura de 10s ocelos y vias nerviosas ocelares de 
algunos insectos. Trab. Lab. Invest. BioZ. Univ. Madr. 16, 109-39. 
FL~~GEL, J. H. L. (1878). Ueber den einheitlichen Bau des Gehirns in den verschiedenen Insekten- 
ordnungen. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 30, Suppl. 556-92. 
HALLER, B. (1905). Ueber den allgemeinen Bauplan des tracheaten Syncerebrums. Arch. micr. 
Anat. 65, 181-279. 
HAMMAR, A. G. (1908). On the nervous system of the larva of Corydalis cornuta. Ann. Ent. Sot. 
Amer. 1, 105-27. 
HANSTR~~M, B. (1925). Comparison between the brain of the caterpillar and the imago in Pieris 
brassicae. Ent. Tidskr. 46, 43-52. 
HANSTR~M, B. (1928a). Die Beziehungen zwischen dem Gehirn der Polychtiten und dem der 
Arthropoden. Z. Morph. OkoZ. Tiere, 11, 152-60. 
HANSTR~~M, B. (1928 b). Vergleichende Anatomie des Nervensystems der wirbellosen Tiere. 
Berlin. 
HANSTR~~M, B .(1930). Ueber das Gehirn von Termopsis nevadensis und PhyZZium pulchrifolium 
nebst Beitragen zur Phylogenie der corpora pedunculata der Arthropoden. Z. Morph. OkoZ. 
Tiere, 19, 732-73. 
HICKSON, S. J. (1885). The. eye and optic tract of insects. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 25, 215-51. 
HOLMES, W. (1947). Recent Advances in Clinical Pathology (chapter on peripheral nerves). 
Churchill, London. 
HOLSTE, G. (1910). Das Nervensystem von Dytiscus marginalis. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 96, 419-76. 
HOLSTE, G. (1923). Das Gehirn von Dytiscus marginalis. Z. wiss. ZooZ. 120, 251-80. 
HOYLE, G. (1955). The anatomy and innervation of locust skeletal muscle. Proc. Roy. Sot. B, 
143,28 l-92. 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). Textbook of Entomology. Ed. 4. Methuen and Co., London. 
JANET, C. (1905). Anatomie de la t&e du Lasius niger. Limoges. 
JAWLEWSKI, H. (1936). Uber den Gehirnbau der Kafer. Z. Morph. iikol. Tiere, 32, 67-91. 
JOBLING, B. (1928). The structure of the head and mouthparts in Culicoidespulicaris L. (Diptera: 
Nematocera). Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 211-36. 
JONESCU, C. N. (1909). Vergleichende Untersuchungen tiber das Gehirn der Honigbiene. Jena Z. 
Nat. ZooZ. 45, 111-80. 
KENYON, F. C. (1896). The brain of the bee. J. Comp. Neural. 6, 133-210. 
KUHNLE, K. F. (1913). Das Gehirn des gemeinen Ohrwurms. Jena Z. Naturwiss. 50, 147-276. 
646 
REFERENCES 
LOWNE, B. T. (1893-95). The Anatomy, Physiology, Morphology and Development of the Blowfly. 
London, 2, 351-745. 
MARCU, 0. (1929). Nervenendigungen an den Muskelfasern von Insekten. Anat. Anz. 67, 
369-80. 
NEWTON, E. F. (1879). On the brain of the cockroach. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 19, 340-56. 
ORLOV, J. (1924). Die Innervation des Darmes der Insekten. Z. wiss. Zool. 122, 425-502. 
PACKARD, A. S. (1880). The Brain of the Locust. Second Rep. U.S. Ent. Comm. 
ROGOSINA, M. (1928). Uber das periphere Nervensystem der Aeschna-Larve. Z. Zellforsch. 6, 
732-58. 
ROMANES, G. J. (1950). The staining of nerve fibres in paraffin sections with silver. J. Anat. 84, 
104-15. 
SAMUEL, E. P. (1953). Towards controllable silver staining. Anat. Rec. 116, 511. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1925). Anatomy and Physiology of the Honeybee. McGraw-Hill Book Co., 
New York and London. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1926). The morphology of insect sense organs and the sensory nervous system. 
Smithson. Misc. COB. 77, no. 8. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York 
and London. 
THOMPSON, C. B. (1913). A comparative study of the brains of three genera of ants with special 
reference to the mushroom bodies. J. Comp. Neural. 23, 5 15-71. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
TIEGS, 0. W. (1955). The flight muscles of insects. Phil. Trans. B, 238, 221-348. 
VIALLANES, H. (1882). Recherches sur l’histologie des insectes. Ann. Sot. Nat. Zool. (6), 14, 
l-348. 
VIALLANES, H. (1885). Le ganglion optique de la Libellule (Aeschna maculatissima). Ann. Sot. 
Nat. Zool. (6), 18, Article 4, l-34. 
VIALLANES, H. (1887a). Le cerveau de la guspe (Vespa crabro et V. vulgais). Ann. Sci. Nat. Zool. 
(7) 2, Article 1, l-100. 
VIALLANES, H. (1887b). Le cerveau du criquet. *Ann. Sot. Nat. Zool. (7), 4, l-120. 
VIALLANES, H. (1893). Centres nerveuses et les organes des sens des animaux articules. Ann. Sci. 
Nat. Zool. (7), 14, 419-56. 
WEBER, H. (1933). Lehrbuch der Entomology. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1950). Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 4. Methuen and Co., London. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1953). The origin of sensory neurones in an insect. Rhodnius prolixus 
(Hemiptera). Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 94, 93-112. 
ZAWARZIN, A. (1914). Histologische Studien tiber Insekten. IV. Die optischen Ganglien der 
Aeschna-Larve. Z. wiss. Zool. 108, 175-257. 
ZAWARZIN, A. (1916). Quelques donnees sur la structure du systeme nerveux intestinal des 
insectes. Russk. zool. Zh. 1, 176-80. 
ZAWARZIN, A. (1924). Histologische Studien tiber Insekten. VI. Das Bauchmark der Insekten. 
Z. wiss. Zool. 122, 323-424. 
(f) THE RETROCEREBRAL SYSTEM 
BODENSTEIN, D. (1945). The corpora allata of mosquitoes. 44th Rep. Connect. State Entomologist, 
Connect. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 488, 396-405. 
CAZAL, P. (1948). Les glandes endocrines retrocerebrales des insectes (Etude morphologique). 
Bull. Biol. Fr. Belg. Suppl. 32, 227 pp. 
POSSOMPES, B. (1948). Les corpora cardiaca de la larve de Chironomus. Bull. Sot. Zool. Fr. 73, 
202-6. 
POSSOMPES, B. (1953). Recherches experimentales sur la determination de la metamorphose de 
Calliphora erythrocephala Meig. Arch. Zool. Exp. G&n. 89, 203-64. 
WILLIAMS, C. M. (1949). The prothoracic glands of insects in retrospect and in prospect. Biol. 
Bull. 97, 111-14. 
XXIX 
THE IMAGO: 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
(g) SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
For general accounts of special sense organs in insects see: Snodgrass (1926, 1935); 
Eltringham (1933); Wigglesworth (1942). For location of different senses in mosquitoes, 
including Ai;des aegypti, see Frings and Frings (1949) ; Frings and Hamrum (1950) ; Roth 
(195 1) ; Roth and Willis (1952). For accounts of particular organs see references given 
under headings below. 
Special sense organs in the mosquito include: the ocelli and compound eyes; Johnston’s 
organ in the pedicel of the antenna, commonly considered an organ of hearing; various 
forms of sensitive hairs, sensory pits, chemo-receptor, thermo-receptor and other sense 
receptors. 
THE OCELLI 
The lateral ocelli (Fig. 80 (1) oc). As shown by Constantineanu (1930) the lateral ocelli, 
which are the functioning eyes in the larval mosquito, are still present in the pupa and 
imago. In the imago they are to be seen on removing the head scales as pigmented areas 
behind and close to the posterior margin of the compound eyes. So viewed they show little 
evidence of organisation and they leave no mark on the cuticle in potash preparations. 
Nevertheless they receive a nerve from the ganglionic plate of the optic tract and in sections 
show some indication of ocellar structure. 
The dorsal ocelli (Fig. 80 (2-4)). Under the circulatory system mention is made of the 
organs described by Clements (1953) description of which was postponed to the present 
chapter since they appeared to be of the nature of modified ocelli. The organs are situated 
one on each side of the middle line just in front of the thickening in the head capsule 
linking the two ocular sclerites and marking the line between vertex and frons (Fig. 80 (2)). 
They appear externally as small circular areas outlined by a somewhat indefinite depression 
in the cuticle of the frons and with a darker central spot. 
In section each organ is seen to consist of an outer thick plate of cuticle covered with 
small microtrichae (3a). Underlying this is a cushion-like pad of tissue (b) consisting of 
columnar epithelial cells with large nuclei towards their inner ends (Clements, 1956b). 
This layer is continued as a flattened nucleated membrane forming the walls of the vesicle. 
According to Clements there is an opening in the wall posteriorly which is closed in a 
valve-like fashion by an extension of the wall of the vesicle into the sac. At the back of the 
vesicle in A. aegypti is a cone-shaped nucleated mass which might be described as some- 
what resembling a ganglion (d). This mass forms the back of the vesicle the walls of which, 
at least in part, are attached to its margin. Its attenuated portion passing backwards is 
continued into a bundle of muscle fibres passing backwards to the aortic wall where this 
648 
THE OCELLI 
structure emerges from beneath the cerebral commissure. In Culex pipiens Clements 
describes the cellular mass behind the vesicle as a spherical mass with a very large number 
of nuclei narrowly separated by cytoplasm apparently without cell boundaries (syncytium). 
These cells are termed receptor cells by Day (1955), but according to Clements they bear 
no resemblance to typical sense cells and apparently are not innervated. In their position, 
however, they certainly call to mind the mass of cells seen in the dorsal ocelli. The bundle 
of muscle fibres passing from the aortic wall to the syncytial body are described by Clements 
as appearing to splay out over or to be inserted into this body. It is these fibres that have 
been figured by Thompson (1905) as nerves passing to what he took to be the dorsal ocelli. 
Clements, however, using the silver impregnation method (Samuel, 1953), has been unable 
to detect any nerve fibres in the bundles. 
Passing from the outer wall of the vesicle by a well-marked somewhat narrowed opening 
is a stout-walled tube having the appearance of a trachea, but with no taenidial markings 
(Fig. 80 (4) e). This vessel can be traced to the base of the antenna where it passes through 
a gap in the antenna1 nerve to the central space of the organ of Johnston and from thence 
into the antenna1 flagellum. It is clearly this tube which is described by Eggers (1924), and 
by Risler (1953), as a blood vessel in the antenna1 flagellum, though neither author notes 
the existence of the organs now being described from which the vessel arises. 
It is also quite evident that these organs in the mosquito are of a similar nature to organs 
that have been described as propulsatory organs in the cockroach and other insects (see 
figure after Pawlowa (1895), given by Wigglesworth (1942), p. 224, and accompanying 
text). The figure referred to shows quite clearly tubes leading into the antenna and muscular 
fibres passing from the aorta. Such organs appear to have been recorded from a wide range 
of insect orders. Wigglesworth, Zoc. cit., notes them as recorded in Periplaneta, Locusta and 
Acridiidae and that similar vessels and ampullae supply the antennae of the honey-bee. 
Clements (1956 b) records an antenna1 organ strikingly similar in Panorpa (Mecoptera). 
What appears to be the same organ has been recorded not only in Anopheles, Culex, 
Theobaldia, Alfdes and Chaoborus (Clements, 1956 b) but in many Nematocera: Tipulidae 
(Dufour, 185 1) ; Ptychoptera, Tricoceridae, Scatopsidae, Blepharocidae (Clements, 1956 b) ; 
Chironomidae (Miall and Hammond, 1900) ; Ceratopogonidae (Jobling, 1928) ; Psychodidae 
(Christophers, et al. 1926) ; Rhyphidae, Cecidomyidae, Mycetophilidae and Sciaridae (Day, 
1955). The organ has not been found by Clements in Thaumalea testacea, Simulium ornatum, 
or Dilophus febrilis. Day was unable to find the organ in a species of Stratiomyidae or in 
Musca domestica and considered it was probably absent in Diptera Brachycera. Clements, 
however, has confirmed the description by Miller (1950) in Drosophila melanogaster Mg. of 
a single vesicle below the ptilinum from which two muscles arise directly without a distinct 
syncytial organ and run to the aorta. Antenna1 vessels pass from each side of the vesicle 
to the antennae. 
The whole appearance of the organs, situated just where the dorsal ocelli might be 
expected and with some indication of what might well be degenerate ocellar structure, 
suggests that they are ocelli modified as propulsatory organs. That such organs might 
easily be recorded as ocelli would seem likely; and contrariwise ocelli might sometimes be 
thought to be these organs. According to Miall and Denny (1886), the white fenestrae 
which in the cockroach lie internal to the antenna1 sockets may represent two simple eyes 
that have lost their dioptric apparatus (p. 100). Jobling (1928) gives a figure showing a 
longitudinal section of an organ in Culicoides (Pl. IX, 1) considered by him to be a dorsal 
649 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
ocellus which has some resemblance to the organ in the mosquito except that it does not 
possess a cavity. He notes that the chitinous integument is transparent, that the cellular 
layer of the anterior part of the ocellus apparently represents the modified corneagen 
cells and that below this layer is a cone formed by cells that are loaded with pigment 
granules and are in direct connection with the fibres of ocellar nerves arising from the 
protocerebral lobes. 
The answer as to the nature of the organs would seem to be decided by whether, when 
such pulsatile structures are present, dorsal ocelli are absent. Day (1955) states that in 
certain families the presence of the organs together with ocelli shows that the two structures 
are distinct. Apparently, however, in the cockroach there are no structures other than the 
propulsatory organs that could be taken as dorsal ocelli and clearly in Culicoides as 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 Figure 80. Compound eye and ocelli. 
Tangential section in region of lateral ocellus, showing nerve to ocellus from the ganglionic 
plate of the optic tract. 
Frontal region of head, showing position of the dorsal ocelli. 
Coronal section through the two antenna1 pulsatory organs (modified dorsal ocelli). 
a, cuticular plate ; b, cellular mass below same ; c, cavity (blood sinus) ; d, ganglion-like mass 
(possibly representing retinal cells); e, muscle fibres passing to d from wall of aorta. 
Reconstruction from serial sections, showing antenna1 blood vessel passing from antenna1 
pulsatory organ. a-d, as in no. 3; e, tubular vessel. 
Logitudinal section of ommatidium of compound eye of Ak;des aegypti, as seen without 
removal of pigment. e, level at which the transverse section given in no. 12 is taken. 
The same of two ommatidia after removal of pigment. a, nucleus of iris pigment cell; 
b, nucleus of accessory pigment cell; c, indicates level at which transverse section given in 
no. 10 has been taken; d, level at which no. 11 is taken; f, level at which no. 13 is taken. 
Portion of tangential section of compound eye passing through the dark staining rim of the 
corneae (as shown at a and b in no. 8). a, position corresponding to a of no. 8; b, position b 
of no. 8; c, the four crystal cell nuclei situated close beneath the lens (shown dotted in om- 
matidium to the left) ; d, nuclei of the two iris pigment cells; e, portion of periphery where the 
section passes through the corneae just above the dark-staining (more sclerotised) lower rim. 
Vertical section through rim of cornea, showing sclerotised rim and interval between the 
corneae (cuticular frame). a, corresponding to position a in no. 7; b, corresponding to 
position b in no. 7. 
Transverse section through level corresponding to b in no. 6 (level of nuclei of accessory 
pigment cells). Shows iris pigment cells surrounding narrowed portion of cone-like body 
and surrounding nuclei of accessory pigment cells (pigment removed). 
Transverse section at level c of no. 6 (pigment removed). 
The same at level d. Rhabdome formed of rhabdomeres surrounded by cytoplasm of 
retinula cells (pigment removed). 
The same at level e of no. 5. Rhabdome in centre with pigment surrounded by ring of 
pigment in inner portion of the retinula cells. 
The same at level offin no. 6. Showing nuclei of 7 retinula cells. 
Lettering: ao, aorta; apt, accessory pigment cells; cb, cone-like body; cbn, nucleus of cone-like 
body; co, cornea; E, compound eye; F, frons; JiZ, flagellum (of antenna) ; gp, ganglionic plate of 
the optic tract; hpc, hypobasal pigment cell; ipc, iris pigment cell; jo, Johnston’s organ; Ze, lens; 
m, muscle bundles (m. 21 and 22); n, nerve to ocellus; oc, ocellus; P’, anterior portion of oeso- 
phageal pump ; pd, pedicel ; rb, rhabdome ; rc, retinula cell ; rcn, nucleus of retinula cell ; sea, scape ; 
t, trachea; V, vertex. 
650 
8 
Figure 80 
651 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
described by Jobling only either the ocelli or the organs are represented. It seems possible 
that the organs have the function of maintaining due tension in the antenna, especially 
where these are long and filamentous. It is even further possible that there might be an 
alternative relationship as between the use of long antennae and the dorsal ocelli as percep- 
tive organs. 
THE COMPOUND EYES 
The compound eyes of Culex have been described by Constantineanu (1930); see also 
Buddenbrock (1939). Recently a very detailed study of the structure and development of 
the compound eyes of a species of Culex (Culex pipiens var. pallens Coq.), of a species of 
Aedes (A. (F’inlaya) japonicus Theo.) and of Anopheles (A. hyrcanus var. sinensis Wied.) has 
been made by Sh8z6 Sato (1950; 1951a, b; 1953a, b). 
In Aedes aegypti the compound eyes occupy the greater part of the lateral aspects of the 
head and are approximately of the same relative size in both sexes. They are kidney-shaped 
with a hollowed-out border anteriorly, deeper in the male than in the female, to accommo- 
date the basal antenna1 segments. Dorsally the eyes approach each other, leaving a narrow 
isthmus of vertex between them. Ventrally they nearly meet beneath the head. Each eye is 
surrounded by a rim of thickened cuticle which forms a shallow apodematous frame, the 
ocular sclerites. These are linked together dorsally by a thickened bar where the vertex 
meets the frons. Each eye is composed of some hundreds of ommatidia, which on the 
surface appear as regularly aligned facets. 
The ommatidia (Fig. 80 (5-13)). The structure of the ommatidia of the compound eye in the 
mosquito has been described by Sh8z6 Sato in the species studied by him. His descrip- 
tion closely accords with the findings in Aedes aegypti. Each ommatidium consists of three 
parts, namely a cornea1 portion, an iris portion and a retinal portion. The cornea1 portion 
includes a thin outer cuticle, the cornea (Fig. 80 (5) co) and an underlying biconvex corneal 
lens (Ze). The cornea is a rigid strongly convex structure about a micron in thickness and 
almost hemispherical in form. The lens is also strongly convex distally, but somewhat 
flatter, though to a variable extent, proximally. When stained it commonly shows a darker 
portion towards its base or several such areas in a nest-like arrangement. Below the lens 
is the cone-like body (cb). In the mosquito this is formed of four crystal cells, the nuclei of 
which, being situated just below the lens, form a characteristic appearance in tangential 
sections through the eye (Fig. 80 (7) c). That the cone-shaped body is not a true crystalline 
body secreted by the crystal cells but constituted by these, places the mosquito eye in the 
class of acone eyes, as distinct from the eucone eyes of many insects. The crystal cells narrow 
proximally so that the cone-like body tapers towards the retinal portion of the ommati- 
dium, finally meeting the central sense body or rhabdome. Surrounding the cone-like 
body are two densely pigmented cells, iris pigment cells (ipc), the nuclei of which appear in 
tangential sections situated to the side of the four crystal cell nuclei (Fig. 80 (7) d). The 
retinal portion of the ommatidium consists of eight pigmented sense cells, retinula cells (rc), 
the large nuclei of seven of which are situated close to the basement membrane (Fig. 80 
(6), (13)). Formed by the inner portions of the retinula cells are the rhabdomeres, which 
together form the rhabdome or central sense organ (Fig. 80 (5), (6) rb). The retinula cells 
contain pigment granules, massed especially in the inner portions around the rhabdome, 
but leaving a clear area, intermediate area, consisting of neurofibrils (Fig. 80 (5-12)). 
Basally is the basement membrane through which fibres pass from the retinula cells to the 
652 
COMPOUND EYES 
plexus of nerve fibres passing between the retinal portions of the ommatidia and the 
ganglionic plate of the optic tract. Beneath the basement membrane opposite each om- 
matidium is a branched pigmented cell, hypobasal pigment cell of Shozo Sato (hpc). Sur- 
rounding the ommatidium is a circle of elongate pigment cells passing between the external 
cuticle of the eye and the basement membrane, but with nuclei all at a level slightly below 
the crystal cells, accessory pigment cells (apt). The outer parts of these cells form a dense 
continuous pigment mass underlying the cuticular frame in which the corneae are set as 
described later in the section on the facets. The iris pigment cells, the retinula cells, the 
accessory pigment cells and also the basement membrane, hypobasal cells and nerve 
plexus are all heavily loaded with pigment. The cone-shaped body and to some extent the 
rhabdome are free from pigment and appear as clear areas in the otherwise densely pig- 
mented ommatidium. 
Certain changes taking place in the eyes of Culex under conditions of light and darkness 
are described by Sh8z8 Sato (1950). In the light adapted condition the parts are as 
described above for AZdes aegypti. After some hours exposure to darkness, however, the 
rhabdome pushes outwards opening up the crystal cells and moving into the iris portion 
of the ommatidium, approaching and nearly touching the lens, which thickens proximally. 
Some change in the same direction is figured by Shoz6 Sato (1953a) in A. japonicus, 
though to a less degree. 
It is clear from the description given above that the mosquito eye is to be classed as of 
appositional type, that is, the retinula cells and rhabdom are placed immediately behind the 
cone and not separated by a long interval with segregation of pigment to allow lateral 
passage of light between neighbouring ommatidia as in the superpositional type of eye as 
seen in some nocturnal insects. 
The facets (Figs. 80, 81). The facets of the compound eyes of insects, including those of the 
mosquito are commonly described as hexagonal. In the case of the mosquito as seen in 
AL;des aegypti this requires some modification, or at least amplification. The appearance 
of the facets varies a good deal depending upon the conditions and magnification under 
which the eye membrane is viewed. If the eye membrane of A. aegypti, appropriately 
treated as described later, is viewed in water under fairly high magnification, each facet 
appears as a clear transparent circular area, representing the cornea with the subjacent 
lens, surrounded by what appears as a ring of less transparent cuticle (Fig. 81 (3)). The 
rings, like the corneae, are circular and hence leave areas where their contours fail to meet. 
Such areas appear as small equilateral triangles, six in number, set around each cornea. 
That these are not merely artefacts is shown by the fact that air may be trapped beneath 
them forming small triangular air bubbles (Fig. 81 (4)). When, however, the eye membrane 
is examined mounted in a medium such as canada balsam, the corneae usually appear as 
large clear circular areas filling or almost filling the facet and with their circumferences in 
contact. Being circular they still leave triangular areas where their circumferences fail to 
meet. Sometimes the small triangular areas described above may be made out within such 
spaces, but commonly the cuticle being now more transparent the appearance is merely of 
triangular spaces between the circular corneae (Fig. 81 (5)). Occasionally the corneae may 
themselves be more or less hexagonal, possibly as a result of pressure in mounting, but 
even so in no case do they form sharp-angled hexagons. 
As shown by the study of mounted preparations and sections, the following conclusions 
653 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
appear to hold good. The corneae are circular in outline, leaving a certain amount of 
relatively flat cuticle between them. The lower rims of the corneae also consist of sclerotised 
cuticle as distinct from the cornea1 substance proper. The difference between the cornea1 
substance proper and the darker-staining sclerotised margins may often be very clearly 
shown as in the section stained by Holmes’ method shown in Fig. 80 (7). Thus, taken 
together, the cuticular substance forms a framework in which the corneae proper are set. 
The intercorneal cuticle further corresponds to and overlies space between the ommatidia 
in which the accessory pigment cells lie. In the undecolorised eye the accessory pigment 
cells underlying the circumferential area form a densely pigmented mass of cytoplasm 
immediately beneath the cuticle further emphasising the fact that the facets are essentially 
circular. 
The facets, may, however, conveniently be considered as hexagonal in so far as in 
apportioning the total eye area between them the area allotted per facet would need to be 
hexagonal. The point, as will be seen later, arises in relation to measurement of the facet. 
Number of facets. In Culex pipiens Sh6z8 Sato (1950) found the number of facets in each 
eye in the female to be 503-60, and in the male 440-62, the surface of the eye in the female 
being 0*285--0*295 nnn2 and in the male 0.21 l-O.236 mm .2. In AZdes japonicus the numbers 
were 504-27 in the female and 409-28 in the male, the eye area being respectively O-286- 
0-314 mm.2 and O-199-0*223 mm.2. 
Table 48. Number of facets and area oj’ the compound eye of female and male 
Aedes aegypti with calculated data based on same I 
Material 
Female no. 1 
Female no. 2 
Female no. 3 
Female no. 4 
Mean 
Male no. 1 
Male no. 2 
Male no. 3 
Mean Calculated 
Calculated diameter 
area of of 
Area of hexagonal inscribed 
No. of eye facet circle (d) 
facets (mm.2/1000) (cL2) (p) 
468 216 462 23-l 
492 236 480 23.6 
421 203 482 23.6 
447 211 472 23.4 
457 216 474 23.4 
362 161 445 22.7 
358 140 391 21.2 
369 131 355 20.3 
363 144 397 21.4 
Figure 81. Facets of the compound eye. 
Showing relation of area of hexagon to diameter of the inscribed circle. The figure shows that 
the area of the hexagon equals that of six equilateral triangles with sides equal to h and that r 
is readily calculated from h since the half base ad is equal to half h and the angle adc which 
is a right angle. 
Camera lucida drawing of eye membrane divided and flattened. The facets are indicated by 
dots placed in their centre. The small crosses indicate lines that terminate (see text). A-D, areas 
ofeye ;A, dorsal ;~,anterO-ksteral; c, lateral ;D, postero-lateral;E,ventral; a,vertex;b, Cuticle 
surrounding base of antenna ; c, cuticle of occiput. 
Showing appearance of facets as examined in water. 
Showing trapping of air under inter-cornea1 cuticle. 
Showing appearance of facets as mounted in balsam. 
To show arrangement of facets in lines at 120”. 
654 
. . . 
. l . l 
C 
50/c 
t I I I I I 4 I I 05mm. , I I 
I1 5 
Figure 81 
655 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
The area of the eye and number of facets as determined in four female and three male 
A. egypti are given in the accompanying table (Table 48). The counts have been made 
from camera lucida drawings of eye membrane suitably cut to lie flat. The mean number of 
facets for female and male respectively works out as 457 and 363. Allowing for some 
possible loss in cutting the membrane the actual numbers may be very slightly greater. 
Arrangements of facets. A few words may be said regarding the arrangement of the facets. 
It is evident that these are arranged in very regular rows. It is also evident that, if the 
facets are circular or hexagonal, of equal size and fitted as closely as possible, they must of 
necessity on a flat or uniformly curved surface be arranged so that in three directions at 
120” to each other they form lines in which diameters through their points of contact are 
continuous and in the same straight line (Fig. 81 (6)). 
Except that the lines of facets in the eye are slightly curved, this is very obviously the 
arrangement (Fig. 81 (2)). The lines are quite long, running from one margin of the eye to 
another, one series nearly horizontal, one dorso-anterior to ventro-posterior and one at 
the same angle in an opposite direction. The surface of the eye not being wholly equally 
convex some adjustment is, however, necessary. One method by which this is effected is 
by the dropping of a line at a suitable point (Fig. 81 (2) x). Another is to make some 
increase in the inter-facetal intervals as is commonly seen in the antero-lateral portion of 
the eye as noted later. 
Since rows of facets are often nearly straight, there are always in all parts of the eye many 
examples where three or four facets have the diameters through points of contact in a 
straight line so that they can be measured simultaneously and the mean taken, thus much 
reducing the labour involved and probably increasing accuracy. An even more important 
point is that with the three directions noted measurements can be made in the three 
directions. In measurements here given, unless otherwise stated, the diameters of the facets 
given have been the means of a considerable number of observations, nearly always fifty 
or more, made in the three directions noted. 
Size of facet. In recording size of facets Sh8z8 Sato divides the kidney-shaped eye into 
the following areas : dorsal ; antero-lateral ; lateral ; postero-lateral ; and ventral. In Culex 
pipiens the facets in the postero-lateral area were smaller than in other parts of the eye 
(diam. 17.7-23.1 ,u), and those in the ventral area larger (diam. 23.1-27.1 ,u). In AL;des 
japonicus the smallest facets were also in the postero-lateral area (diam. 19G29*5,~), the 
facets in other parts of the eye ranging from 23.3-29.5,~. In this case gradation in size 
showed a contour effect, the facets being smaller posteriorly and increasing in size towards 
the anterior margin with a maximum in the ventral area. In measuring the size of the facet, 
which he describes as hexagonal, Sh8z8 Sato uses the diameter of the inscribed circle 
within the hexagon. 
A special interest attaches to the size of facet in different areas of the eye in A. aegypti 
since, while Culex pipiens is essentially a nocturnal or crepuscular feeder, Ai;des aegypti 
under natural conditions is strictly diurnal, though usually attacking in the shade. Another 
reason why size of facet in different parts of the eye is of interest is that Kennedy (1940), 
basing his conclusions on behaviour in flight of A. aegypti, considered that there was some 
difference in function of the different parts. 
Before giving observations made on this species a word may be said on technique. One 
difficulty is the pigment which must be removed. Another is the markedly convex shape 
656 
COMPOUND EYES 
of the eye surface which prevents the eye membrane being spread flat without dividing it 
up in some way. The best results have been obtained by treating the bisected, or otherwise 
divided, head, of material fixed in Bles’s fluid (form01 acetic alcohol), overnight in 10 per 
cent KHO at 37” C. and after changing to water removing with a few touches of the needle 
any still adherent tissue. This leaves the eye membrane perfectly clear from pigment and 
retaining its original form. I have not found Grenacher’s fluid so effective for this purpose. 
To ensure the eye membrane being suitably flat for examination it is necessary either to 
nick it, or better, to divide it up into recognisable portions (or the head before potashing 
may be suitably divided). The portions may then, after transfer to water, be mounted 
direct in a very small drop of water under a cover-glass. The same fragments can later, if 
desired, be mounted in the usual way. A useful medium for the purpose is Bhatia’s 
medium (see under ‘ Technique’, p. 116) to which the specimen can be transferred direct 
from absolute alcohol. By measuring the same specimens in water and again after mounting 
in Bhatia’s medium it was ascertained that no appreciable difference in size of facet had 
occurred. The advantage of examining in water is that the material is softer and lies flatter. 
Measurements made from sectioned material also gave very similar results indicating that 
the eye membrane is a relatively rigid structure, as is also shown by the shape being 
retained after treatment with potash. 
One method of determining the mean area of the facet is to determine the total eye area 
and divide this by the number of counted facets. Data in this respect are given in the 
accompanying table (Table 48). The mean area so determined from four females was 
0.216 mm? and from three males O-144 mm.2. 
The area of facet so given is that where the facet is considered as a hexagon and to 
obtain the diameter of the inscribed circle as used by Sh6z8 Sato it is necessary to calculate 
this from the data. This can readily be done. 
By graphical methods it can be shown in regard to a regular hexagon and the inscribed 
circle that the area of the hexagon equals twelve triangles of the size of the triangle ADC 
(Fig. 81 (l)), t wo of which are equal to the parallelogram AEDC of which the sides are 
equal respectively to the radius of the inscribed circle and half the side of the hexagon. 
From such a relation it can be readily worked out that the area of the hexagon in terms of 
d (2r) is given by the expression d= l-075 ,/A, 
where d is the diameter of the inscribed circle and A the area of the hexagon. Using this 
formula, the mean for the diameter of the inscribed circle in four female and three male 
A. aegypti has been given in column 4 of Table 48. The values give as the mean for the 
female 23.35~ and for the male 21.4,~~ 
To arrive at the size of facet for different areas of the eye, however, it is necessary to 
measure d directly. Data in this respect are given in Table 49. 
The data given in the table show very definitely that the facets in the male are smaller 
than in the female, the mean values being 23.4,~ for the female and 21.4~ for the male, 
incidentally almost exactly the figures obtained by the first method of arriving at these 
values. 
It is evident also that in A. aegypti any difference in size of facet in different parts of the 
eye is very small. Such differences as do appear are the slightly smaller facets in the dorsal 
area and somewhat larger facets in the lateral and antero-lateral areas, the effect in the 
latter instance being, at least to some degree, due to an increase in the cuticular framework. 
42 657 CH 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
There is also some indication, as noted by Sh8z6 Sato in his species, of an increase in size 
passing forwards from the postero-lateral area to the antero-lateral, including to some 
extent the ventral area. It may be worth noting that in the larva the ommatidia of the 
compound eyes commence as a fine crescentic line just in front of the ocellus that will 
eventually form the posterior margin of the eye and that growth of the eye occurs by 
successive addition of lines of facets anterior to this. 
Table 49. The diameter of the inscribed circle of facets in d@erent areas of the 
compound eye of @male and male Aedes aegypti 
Material 
Female A 
Female B 
Female C 
Female D 
Female E 
Female F 
Female G 
Female H 
Mean 
Male K 
Male L 
Male M 
Male N 
Mean Dorsal 
w 
21.3 
22.5 
224 
21.9 
23.4 
22.1 
21.6 
22.9 
22.3 
20.6 
20.1 
19.9 
20.3 
20.2 Antero- 
lateral 
@I 
23.8 
24.5 
24.4 
24.4 
23.8 
24.7 
24.2 
22.1 
24.0 
22.1 
21.2 
22.6 
21.6 
21.9 Lateral 
0 
23.9 
23.4 
22.9 
23.2 
23.8 
23.8 
22.9 
24.6 
23.6 
21.2 
21.9 
22.5 
22.6 
22.05 Postero- 
lateral 
w 
22.4 
23.4 
22.6 
22.6 
23.4 
23.4 
22.2 
22.5 
22.8 
20.3 
21.3 
19.1 
21.2 
20.5 Ventral 
(CL) 
23.1 
24.2 
23.1 
23.4 
23.4 
22.9 
22.9 
22.5 
23.2 
20.9 
21.8 
21.6 
20.3 
21.15 Examined in 
Water 
Water 
Water 
Water 
Water 
Water 
Bhatia’s medium 
Serial sections 
- 
Water 
Bhatia’s medium 
Serial sections 
Serial sections 
- Mean 
22.9 
23.6 
23.6 
23.2 
23.6 
23.4 
22.8 
22.9 
23.25 
21.0 
21.3 
21.1 
21.2 
21.15 
Note. A, B, C, D are normal-sized females. 
E is a selected large female, measuring 7.2 mm. from tip of proboscis to tip of abdomen. 
F is a selected small female giving 6.0 mm. for the same measurement. 
G is the same female as F but measurements made on the eye parts after mounting. 
Since there was a reduction in size in the male as compared with the much larger female 
insect it was thought of interest to see if reduction in size of facet occurred with reduction 
in size of the female. As shown in the table a small female, however, gave very similar 
measurements to those of a selected large female. To obtain a female as small as a male 
would have required special breeding and the question must be left unanswered for the 
present. It is clearly, however, mainly by reduction in number of facets that adjustment 
is made to the size of the eye in the respective sexes. 
JOHNSTON’S ORGAN 
The sense organ in the second segment of the antenna commonly known as Johnston’s 
organ is present very generally in insects, but is especially developed in the Culicidae where 
it has received much attention. First drawn attention to by Johnston (1855) as the auditory 
apparatus of the Culex mosquito it was studied in respect to its functions by Mayer (1874) 
and its structure described by Child (1894). Later it has been described in great detail by 
Eggers (1924), in Culex and in Anopheles stephensi by Risler (1953, 1955) (see also 
Debauche, 1935 ; Tischner, 1953). I have seen a reference to P. Mayer, Sopra certi organi di 
sense nelle antennae dei Dipteri (Rome, 1879), but have been unable to see this work or 
find any note as to its contents. 
Essentially the organ is a massive collection of sensilla of scolopophore type inserted 
into the region of the articulation of the antenna1 flagellum with the pedicel. It is considered 
658 
JOHNSTON’S ORGAN 
to register movements or vibrations of the flagellum. To judge from its great size and 
complexity it almost certainly has some very important function and according to Mayer 
the vibrations of the antenna1 hairs enable it to function as a directive organ towards 
sounds, notably by the male, in which the antenna1 hairs and the organ are especially 
developed, in locating the female. The differences in the organ in the sexes in A. aegypti, 
however, seem insufficient to point to the organ as having a function restricted to the 
male for such a purpose. 
The organ is located in and occupies the whole interior of the globular second antenna1 
segment or pedicel. Apically this is flattened and its walls turned in and depressed to form 
a deep somewhat funnel-shaped depression or pit, apical pit, at the bottom of which is the 
articulation with the third segment of the antenna forming the base of the flagellum. The 
outer wall of the pedicel is strongly and uniformly sclerotised with an inner lining of cells 
of hypoderm type. There appears to be no special attachment of the organ to the walls. 
The apical pit is also lined with hard and rigid cuticle covered with numerous microtrichae 
and irregular circularly disposed linear thickenings. The lower margin of the wall of the 
pit, which is much thickened, forms a strongly sclerotised circular ridge covered with 
thorn-like microtrichae, basal ridge. The floor of the pit is flat formed by a circular plate in 
the middle of which is set the base of the flagellum. The plate, basal plate, articulates by 
a narrow line of articular membrane with the base of the flagellum and by its outer edge 
with the sides of the apical pit below the basal ridge (Fig. 82 (1)). The plate stains differently 
from the usual cuticular thickenings and may be more resilient in character. It is thickest 
where it articulates with the base of the flagellum and thins out towards its edge. Beneath 
it is a thick layer of cells with large nuclei resembling those of the subcuticular hypoderm. 
In connection with the plate is a rather complex arrangement for the insertion of the 
numerous scolopale elements or sense rods (St@ of German writers) of the mass of sensilla 
forming the organ. Briefly this consists of ridges which radiate out on the basal plate and 
are continued on to the lower wall of the apical pit below the basal ridge. Into these ridges 
(Spangen of the German writers) are inserted rows of the numerous fine sense rods coming 
from the main mass of scolopophores, that is, those coming from the sense cells of all the 
outer layer of the organ other than those of the extreme apical portion. Between the ridges 
are membranous septa which form a conspicuous feature in sections that pass through them 
(Fig. 82 (0, (2)). 
Not all the scolopophores are inserted into the ridges. Three sets of scolopophores are 
distinguished by Eggers. The main bulk, outer series, are those referred to above as arising 
from the greater part of the outer layer of the organ and having sense rods inserted into the 
ridges described above. In the apical portion of the organ are scolopophores, inner series, the 
sense rods of which pass down between the septa to be inserted into the upper surface of 
the basal plate towards its outer edge (scp’). A third and still smaller series of scolopo- 
phores have rods inserted into the lower surface of the basal plate (scp”‘). 
The scolopophores as described by Debauche (1935) and figured by Eggers and others 
consist of an outer sense cell and two supporting cells, namely a proximal sheath cell and 
a distant cap cell. But though the sensilla of Johnston’s organ are of scolopophore 
nature they do not according to Snodgrass possess the characteristic peg-shaped rod or 
scolops characteristic of the scolopophore sensilla of some other sense organs. The outer 
zone of the organ consists of the sense cells, the nuclei of which form a double or triple 
layer (Fig. 82 (1) sn.c). Internal to this outer zone is a zone free from nuclei that consists of 
659 42-2 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
nerve fibres. Internal to the zone of nerve fibres there are two zones characterised by 
elongate oval nuclei, the nuclei respectively of the sheath and cap cells. The nuclei of these 
cells and the bundles of scolopidial filaments are arranged, especially in the male organ, 
in radially aligned sheets, the nuclei situated externally and the mass of fine filaments 
internally. 
In the centre of the organ is a space in which pass two nerves to the flagellum, the tubular 
blood vessel from the propulsatory organ and a small trachea. The central space is formed 
by the antenna1 nerve opening up as it enters the organ in a calyx-like manner. As it does 
so it leaves ventrally and internally a gap that acts as a passage-way into the central space, 
it being through this gap that the blood vessel of the propulsatory organ and the trachea 
pass. It is from here also that the two nerves to the flagellum arise from the inner aspect 
of the antenna1 nerve (Fig. 82 (1) b). 
THE SENSE ORGANS OF THE HALTERES 
A description of the halteres has already been given when dealing with the external 
structure of the imago. It is necessary to supplement this in the present connection by a 
more detailed account of the sensory organs with which these are so well supplied. A most 
detailed account, giving practically all that is known of the structure of the sensory organs 
Figure 82. Sense organs of Johnston’s organ and haltere. 
Vertical section through second antenna1 segment to show main features of Johnston’s organ. 
a, central space; b, showing position of opening through the antenna1 nerve and site of giving 
off of nerves to the filament. 
Showing insertion of the three series of scolopopidia and nature of the septa. a, septum seen 
on the flat; b, septa as usually seen cut in transverse section. 
Lower portion of right haltere showing dorsal surface and position of the dorsal scapal plate 
and basal plate. On the right border are the two undifferentiated papillae. 
Portion of ventral surface of left haltere showing raised membranous protuberance on which 
is situated the ventral scapal plate. Note size and number of microtrichae. 
A small portion of the dorsal scapal plate to show features of the rhomboidal sensillae and 
scattered microtrichae. 
Cross-section of rhomboidal sensilla of scapal plates. A, dorsal scapal plate; B, ventral scapal 
plate. 
Tangential and vertical section of sensilla of basal plate. A, superficial cut showing central 
sensory rod and absence of microtrichae; B, cut through base of sensilla showing central 
body and cuticular framework; c, vertical section showing processes of sense cells. 
Sections through rhomboidal sensillum to show structure (after Pflugstaedt and Pringle). 
A, cut in direction of slit; B, cut transversely to slit. 
Tangential section near tip of terminal segment of maxillary palp to show club-shaped and 
hair-like sensilla. a, thin-walled club-shaped sensitive hairs ; b, thin-walled sensitive hairs ; 
c, microtrichae; d, normal thick-walled hairs. 
Lettering: a.p, apical pit; b.p, basal plate (of Johnston’s organ) ; b.r, basal ridge; b.v, blood vessel 
(from propulsatile organ) ; bp, basal plate (of haltere) ; dsp, dorsal scapal plate ; nf, one of the two 
nerves to antenna1 filament; XC, sclerotised anterior border of haltere; scm, membranous area; 
scp, zone of distal cap cells (inner) and enveloping cells (outer) of scolopophorous sensilla; 
scp’, inner series of scolopophorous sensilla; scp”, outer series of scolopophorous sensilla; 
scp,“’ third series of scolopophorous sensilla inserted beneath the basal plate; sn.c, sense cell 
zone; spn, cuticular rods (Spangen) ; up, undifferentiated papillae. 
660 
scm 
’ 20/’ J 3 
7 
Figure 82 
661 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
of the halteres in the higher Diptera (Sarcophaga, CalZiphora, Syrphis, and Eristalis), is 
that by Pflugstaedt (1912). A more recent account, giving a very clear and concise descrip- 
tion of the organs in Calliphora, is that by Pringle (1948) (see also Lee, 1885 ; Weinland, 189 1; 
Lowne, 1895). On these organs in the mosquito the only detailed account is that by 
Prashad (1916). From this account it is clear that the organs, both in anatomical features 
and minute structure, are very similar to those of the higher Diptera. They consist of 
(1) the dorsal scapal plate; (2) the ventral scapal plate; (3) the basal plate; and (4) two 
undifferentiated papillae on the posterior edge of the scape. How far other structures can 
be stated to be present will be discussed later. 
In Calliphora there are also present: a group of sensilla situated close to the anterior 
margin of the basal plate, dorsal Hicks papillae; a smaller group on the ventral surface 
proximal to the ventral scapal plate, ventral Hicks papillae; an undifferentiated papilla, 
apparently distinct from (4) as given above, and situated on the anterior side of the dorsal 
scapal plate; and two chordotonal organs situated in the basal portion of the haltere, a 
small and a large chordotonal organ. 
The dorsal scapal plate in AL;des aegypti consists of about 12 rows of sensilla, the same 
number as noted by Prashad for A. pseudotaeniatus. In the middle rows of this series the 
number of sensilla is seven, the total number of sensilla in the group being from 60 to 
65 (Fig. 82 (3)). The sensilla consist of rhomboidal papilla each composed of two opposed 
lateral elevations with thickened crests which form the edges of a cleft-like opening into 
a cavity in which the termination of the sensory cell is situated. The arrangement of the 
sensilla suggests ridges thrown into oblique corrugations, each corrugation forming a 
sensillum (Fig. 82 (5)). When cut transversely to the ridges the sensilla appear as mound-like 
elevations with flat intervening areas of cuticle from which arise scattered microtrichae 
(Fig. 82 (5)). Within the opening of the sensillum there is an elongate sunken cuticular body 
and deeper in than this a globular mass. The sensilla therefore conform to the structure 
given by Pflugstaedt for the rhomboidal sensilla in CaZZiphora and the higher Diptera as 
indicated in Fig. 82 (8). 
The ventral scapalplate has about nine to ten rows of sensilla, but differs from the dorsal 
scapal plate in that each row is formed of two, or at most three sensilla. The sensilla are 
rhomboidal and resemble those of the dorsal plate, but are slightly smaller and the micro- 
trichae arising from the cuticle are much longer and thicker, so much so that the sensilla 
are not so clearly displayed as are those of the dorsal plate. Also the sensilla of the ventral 
scapal plate, in place of being like those of the dorsal scapal plate on a flat surface, appear to 
be borne upon a rather prominent narrow membranous elevation situated just posterior 
to the hard scapal anterior margin. On this elevation the more anterior of the sensilla 
are contained as double furrows (Fig. 82 (4)). 
The basal plate consists of nine rows of sensilla, the number of sensilla in the rows 
varying from nine anteriorly to two or three posteriorly, the whole forming a roughly 
triangular area (Fig. 82 (3) bp). The sensilla appear as hemispherical swellings smaller 
than the rhomboidal sensilla of the scapal plates and in close contact without any micro- 
trichae. In section they show as rather globular structures set in a cuticular framework. 
Passing into each sensillum is a stout process from a sensory cell, the whole series of such 
processes forming in sections a fan-like arrangement (Fig. 82 (7) C). Accompanying the 
large nuclei of the sensory cells are smaller nuclei of the associated cells. 
The two undi~rentiatedpapillae are situated on the thin membranous edge of the scape 
662 
THE HALTERES 
towards its proximal end (Fig. 82 (3) up). They are on the opposite side of the dorsal 
scapal plate to the large single undifferentiated papilla as figured by Pringle in Calliphora. 
In Calliphora the dorsal Hicks papillae are situated close to the basal plate on its anterior 
side, that is towards the curved-in lower end of the sclerotised anterior border of the 
haltere. In Agdes aegypti there is no separate group of sensilla in this position, but the 
two most anterior rows of sensilla of the basal plate, which are slightly out of line with 
the rest, may represent this structure (Fig. 82 (3) bp). The ventral Hicks papillae in Calli- 
phora are situated on a prominence proximal to the ventral scapal plate. I have not 
succeeded in finding a corresponding structure in AL;des aegypti. 
The two chordotonal organs in Calliphora, as given by Pringle after Pflugstaedt, are 
situated in the basal portion of the haltere. The large chordotonal organ consists of a 
large number of typical sensilla situated beneath a well-marked protuberance of the 
cuticle on the ventral side of the basal region of the haltere posterior to and proximal to 
the scapal plate. Its direction is across the base at an angle of 45” to the longitudinal axis 
of the haltere sloping distally towards the rear. The sensilla are not visible on the surface. 
The small chordotonal organ extends from the dorsal surface at the distal margin of the 
basal plate vertically to the ventral surface behind the proximal end of the scapal plate. 
The dome-shaped protuberance appears to be present in Ak’des aegypti as also a mass of 
sensory cells, but the actual structures present still require to be ascertained. 
Entering the base of the haltere is the large haltere nerve. Before entering the haltere 
this gives off a lower branch which passes to the base of the organ. The main nerve divides 
into fan-shaped portions, passing to the sensory cells at the bases of the different sensory 
organs. 
SENSE ORGANS OF THE ANTENNAE, PALPS AND MOUTH-PARTS 
Trichoid sensilla consisting of thin-walled hairs on the antennae of both sexes in A. aegypti 
are described by Roth and Willis (1952) (see also Roth, 1951). In the male these are 
restricted to the last two flagellar segments (the other segments, apart from the large hairs, 
being smooth and hairless). But in the female such hairs are present on all the thirteen 
flagellar segments. They are 40-50,~ in length, thin walled and without articulated base, 
arising from thin membrane over a pore canal surrounded distally by a semicircular ridge in 
the cuticle. Proximally a median ridge passes backwards. They are set at irregular intervals 
along the length of the segment and in the female number some 30-50 on a segment. They 
are considered on experimental evidence by Roth and Willis to be hygroreceptors. In 
addition to the thin-walled hair sensilla the above-mentioned authors also note the 
presence of a certain number of peg-like sensilla on the antenna1 segments. Smith (1919) 
has figured basiconic sensilla at the tip of the antenna in Culex pipiens. In the male of 
Anopheles stephensi Risler (1953) notes the presence of sense cells at the base of the long hairs 
on the first flagellar segment. In Ak;des aegypti in both male and female the tip of the 
antenna ends in a rather suddenly constricted spike at the end of which are two thin-walled 
papilla-like elevations. 
The female palps of A. aegypti are abundantly supplied on the terminal segment with 
thin-walled club-shaped sensilla as described in this species by Roth and Willis (1952). 
This segment is free from scales on its ventral aspect where the sensilla are chiefly present 
and the surface is strongly convex, suggesting a definitely tactile organ. On the preceding 
segment few or none of these sensilla are present. The sensilla are characteristically club- 
663 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
shaped hairs about 20-30,~ in length arising from membrane covering a circular pore canal 
surrounded by a circular cuticular ridge (Fig. 82 (9) a). Pointed trichoid sensilla are also 
present (b). The terminal segment of the male palps is not swollen like that of the female 
and is uniformly covered with scales. It lacks the above-mentioned sensilla and has not 
the appearance of an organ used for tactile purposes. At the extreme tip of the female 
palps is a large circular area of membrane carrying a central short sclerotised peg. 
SENSE ORGANS OF THE LABIUM AND BUCCAL CAVITY 
Frings and Hamrum (1950) describe the sensory structures on the labella of A. aegypti. 
They note four types of hairs on the labella in both female and male, namely (1) short 
epicuticular hairs about 7,u long (non-sensory); (2) long pointed hairs about 40,~ in length 
arranged in a fan-shaped pattern at the tip of the labella and scattered elsewhere, which 
appear to be tactile; (3) medium-sized curved hairs 20,~ in length at the tip and on the 
ventral surface similar to gustatory end-organs on labella of other Diptera (Frings and 
O’Neal, 1946 ; Frings and Frings, 1949) that may be chemoreceptors ; (4) short blunt peg- 
like hairs, 6,~ in length, of which there are about fourteen on the dorsal surface of each 
labellum of unknown function. 
Towards the tip of the labrum are the two small gustatory papillae (of authors) (Fig. 54 
(8) A). They are present also on the modified labrum of the male (Fig. 54 (8) B). 
In the buccal cavity are the sensory pits on, and at the sides of, the anterior hard palate 
and those on the posterior margin of the organ (Fig. 63 (4), (5), (8)). These appear as 
circular pore canals covered with membrane bearing usually a small central hair. Those on 
the hard palate itself are larger and more typically of basiconic type. 
SENSE ORGANS OF THE LEGS, WINGS AND GENITALIA 
One of the most striking features of the sensory equipment of A. aegypti apart from the 
major sense organs is the large number of ‘sensory pits’ with which the under surface of 
the thorax and bases of the legs are provided. A rather conspicuous sensillum is present on 
each side of the face of the prothorax at the edge of the propleural extensions from the 
prosternum (Fig. 55 (4) so). On the mid-coxae are the little groups of eight sensilla in two 
rows of four (Fig. 56 (1) so) and on the posterior aspect of the hind coxa is on each side a 
little group of three sensilla (Fig. 55 (7) so). On the trochanters, close to their articulation 
with the coxae are two groups, each of two rows of four sensilla (Fig. 56 (4), (9) a, 6) and 
on the bulge near the base of each femur is again a double row of sensilla (Fig. 56 (4), (5)). 
According to Frings and Hamrum there are on the tarsi of the fore- and mid-legs of 
A. aegypti, among non-sensory spines and scales, many slightly curved hairs probably 
tactile in function. At the distal end of each segment of the tarsus these authors also note 
the presence of groups of short curved hairs of approximately the same size and appearance 
as those they have described on the labella. These may be tactile receptors, though proof is 
wanting. Menon (1951) describes two rows of bud-like sensilla on the fore- and mid-tarsi 
in Culicines, on the fore-tarsi only in Anophelines and none in Megarhinus. Wallis (1954) 
in AZdes aegypti found all tarsal segments provided with curved thin-walled spines cor- 
responding with the sensory areas. There do not appear to be any sensory pits, so far as 
I have been able to ascertain, on the tarsi of A. aegypti. 
Two small groups of scattered sensory pits are present on the remigium at the base of 
664 
LEGS, WINGS, GENITALIA 
the wing (Fig. 57 (8) Rg). These are circular or slightly oval sensilla about 3,~ in diameter, 
hemispherical in shape and lacking any central hair. If they are proprioreceptors and of 
campaniform type, they would resemble the sensilla of the basal plate of the haltere and 
not the rhomboidal sensilla of the scapal plates. 
In another communication (Christophers, 1951) I have described in Culex pipiens and 
C. molestus a sensory pit of the hair-bearing type at the side of the female hypopygium 
just posterior to the ninth tergite at its outer angles. 
REFERENCES 
BUDDENBROCK, W. V. (1939). Grundriss der vergleichenden Physiologic. Ed. 2. Berlin. 
CHILD, C. M. (1894). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der antennalen Sinnesorgane der Insekten. 2. wiss. 
ZOOZ. 58, 494-500. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1951). Note on morphological characters differentiating Culex pipiens L. 
from Culex molestus Forskal and the status of these forms. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 102, 
376 (figure). 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R., SHORTT, H. E. and BARRAUD, P. J. (1926). The anatomy of the sandfly 
Phlebotomus argentipes Ann. and Brun. (Diptera). I. The head and mouth parts of the imago. 
Indian Med. Res. Mem. no. 4. 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1953, 1956a, b). See references in ch. XXVII (d), p. 625. 
CONSTANTINEANU, M. J. (1930). See references in ch. XIV (d-e), p. 351. 
DAY, M. F. (1955). A new sense organ in the head of the mosquito and other Nematocerous 
insects. Aust. J. ZooZ. 3, 331-5. 
DEBAUCHE, H. (1935). Les organes sensoriels antennaires de Hydropsyche Zongipennis. CeZZuZe, 
44, 45-83. 
DUFOUR, L. (1851). See references in ch. XXVI, p. 598. 
EGGERS, F. (1924). Zur Kenntnis antennaler stiftfiihrender Sinnesorgane der Insekten. 2. Morph. 
OkoZ. Tiere, 2, 259-349. 
ELTRINGHAM, H. (1933). The Senses of Insects. Methuen’s Biological Monographs, London. 
FRINGS, H. and FRINGS, M. (1949). The loci of contact chemoreceptors in insects. A review with 
new evidence. Amer. MidZ. Nat. 41, 602-58. 
FRINGS, H. and HAMRUM, C. L. (1950). The contact chemoreceptors of adult yellow fever 
mosquitoes, AFdes aegypti, J. N.Y. Ent. Sot. 58, 133-42. 
FRINGS, H. and O’NEAL, B. R. (1946). The loci and thresholds of contact chemoreceptors in 
females of the horsefly, Tabanus sulcifrons Meig. J. Exp. ZooZ. 103, 61-79. 
HOLMES, W. (1947). Recent Advances in CZinicaZ Pathology (chapter on peripheral nerves). 
Churchill, London. 
JOBLING, B. (1928). The structure of the head and mouthparts in Culicoides puzicaris L. (Diptera: 
Nematocera). Bull. Ent. Res. 18, 211-36. 
JOHNSTON, C. (1855). Auditory apparatus of the CuZex mosquito. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. (old series), 
3,97-102. 
KENNEDY, J. S. (1940). The visual response of flying mosquitoes. Proc. ZooZ. Sot. Lond. A, 109, 
221-42. 
LEE, A. B. (1885). Les balanciers des dip&es, leur organes sensiferes et leur histologie. Rec. ZooZ. 
Suisse, 2. 
LOWNE, B. T. (1895). The Anatomy, Physiology, Morphology and Development of the Blowfly. 
London. 
MAYER, A. M. (1874). Experiments on the supposed auditory apparatus of the mosquito. Amer. 
Nat. 8, 577-92. 
MAYER, P. (1879). Sopra organi di sense nelle antennae dei Ditteri. Rome. 
MENON, M. A. V. (1951). On certain little-known external characters of adult mosquitoes and 
their taxonomic significance. Proc. R. Ent. Sot. London (B) 20, 63-71. 
665 
SPECIAL SENSE ORGANS 
MIALL, L. C. and DENNY, A. (1886). The Cockroach. Love11 Reeve and Co., London. 
MILLER, A. (1950). In Demerec, M., Biology of Drosophila. Wiley and Sons, New York. 
PAWLAWA, M. (1895). Uber ampullenartige Blutcirculationsorgane im Kopfe verschiedener 
Orthopteren. Zool. Anz. 18, 7-13. 
PFLUGSTAEDT, H. (1912). Die Halteren der Dipteren. 2. wiss. 2002. 100, l-59. 
PRASHAD, B. (1916). The halteres of mosquitoes and their function. Ind. J. Med. Res. 3, 503-9. 
PRINGLE, J. W. S. (1948). The gyroscopic mechanism of the halteres of Diptera. Phil. Trans. B, 
233, 347-84. 
RISLER, H. (1953). Das Gehiirorgan der Mtinnchen von Anopheles stephensi Liston (Culicidae). 
2001. Jb. 73, 163-6. 
RISLER, H. (1955). Das Gehiirorgan der Mannchen von Culex pipiens, L. Ai;des aegypti L. und 
Anopheles stephensi Liston (Culicidae), eine vergleichend morphologische Untersuchung. 
2001. Jb. 74, 478. 
ROTH, L. M. (1951). Loci of sensory end organs used by mosquitoes (Aedes aegypti (L.) and 
Anopheles quadrimaculatus Say) in receiving host stimuli. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 44, 59-74. 
ROTH, L. M. and WILLIS, E. R. (1952. Possible hygroreceptors in AL;des aegypti (L.) and Blatella 
germanica (L.). J. Morph. 91, l-14. 
SAMUEL, E. P. (1935). See in references ch. XXVIII, p. 647. 
SH~Z~ SATO (1950). Compound eyes of Culex pipiens var. pallens Coquillett. Sci. Rep. Tohoku 
Univ. (4) (Biol.), 18, 33 1-41. 
SH~Z~ SATO (1951 a). Development of the compound eye of Culexpipiens var. pallens Coquillett. 
Sci. Rep. Tohoku Univ. (4) (Biol.), 19, 23-8. 
SH~Z~ SATO (1951 b). Larval eyes of Culex pipiens var. pallens Coquillett. Sci. Rep. Tohoku Univ. 
(4) (Biol.), 19, 29-32. 
SH&~ SATO (1953a). Structure and development of the compound eye of A@des (Pinlaya) 
japonicus Theobald. Sci. Rep. Tohoku Univ. (4) (Biol.), 20, 33-44. 
SH~Z~ SATO (1953 b). Structure and development of the compound eye of Anopheles hyrcanus 
sine&s Wiedemann. Sci. Rep Tohoku Univ. (4) (Biol.), 20, 45-53. 
SMITH, K. M. (1919). A comparative study of certain sense organs in the antennae and palpi of 
Diptera. Proc. Zool. Sot. Lond. 1919, 31-69. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1926). The morphology of insect sense organs and the sensory nervous system. 
Smithson. Misc. COB. 77, no. 8. 
SNOGDRASS, R. E. (1935). Principles of Insect Morphology. New York and London. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
TISCHENER, H. (1953). Uber den Gehijrsinn von Stechmiicken. Acustica. 3 [Quoted by Risler 
(1955)]. 
WALLIS, R. C. (1954). A study of oviposition activity of mosquitoes. Amer. J. Hyg. 60, 135-68. 
WEINLAND, E. (1891). uber die Schwinger (Halteren) der Dipteren. 2. wiss. Zool. 51, 55-166. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2 (and subsequent 
editions). Methuen and Co., London. 
666 
xxx 
THE IMAGO: THE EXCRETORYAND 
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS 
(h) THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
Excretion may be external or internal. The chief organs of external excretion are the 
Malpighian tubules, the waste products being passed out of the body with the faeces. The 
organs of internal excretion are mainly the fat-body cells and the nephrocytes in which 
waste products are accumulated in the cells and retained in the body. 
THE MALPIGHIAN TUBULES (Fig. 83) 
The Malpighian tubules in the imaginal mosquito have been described in Culex pipiens 
and in Theobaldia annulata by Schindler (1878), who gives a drawing of the gut in the 
imago with the five tubules. He also notes the unusual number of five, but records a 
similar number in Psychoda and in Ptychoptera. It was in the imago also that Lecaillon 
(1899) observed ciliform processes in Culex pipiens. More recent are the observations on 
the tubules of the imago of Culex pipiens by Roubaud (1923) ; on those of Anopheles 
maculipennis by Nuttall and Shipley (1903) and by Roubaud, Zoc. cit. ; and on the tubules 
of the imago of Anopheles claviger (a hibernating species) by Missiroli (1925, 1927).* 
Especially informative is the paper by Wigglesworth (193 1) describing the mechanism and 
appearances seen in Rhodnius (a blood-sucking insect that, like the mosquito, gorges itself 
at one sitting with a blood meal) and the recent work of Ramsay (1953) on excretion 
(see under ‘ Physiology’, p. 7 10). 
Unlike the alimentary canal and many other structures which change considerably 
during passage from larva to imago, the Malpighian tubules remain intact, including their 
epithelium, throughout metamorphosis and the description already given of the tubules 
in the larva largely holds good for those of the imago. They have much the same length as 
in the full-grown larva, about 2.5-3.5 mm., but the more restricted space in the imaginal 
abdomen causes them to be more crowded together and coiled. Even so their original 
arrangement as described in the larva is usually to be made out. Thus the two loops of the 
dorso-lateral and ventro-lateral tubules, for example, show up conspicuously in the gorged 
insect through the transparent cuticle of the pleura against the black background of the 
blood-filled mid-gut (Fig. 51 (4)), and the ends of the two ventro-lateral tubules come 
characteristically into relation, close to the middle line, with the posterior end of the seventh 
sternite. Their relation to other structures remains also much as in the late larval period, 
that is they take origin in the fifth abdominal segment from the anterior portion of the 
pyloric ampulla, one dorsal and two on each side laterally. In the posterior part of the 
abdomen, especially when the ovaries are enlarged, they come into close relation with the 
* See also Veneziani (1904), Bugajew (1928), Saint-Hilaire (1927), Patton (1953). 
667 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
proximal portion of the rectum, which, swollen with its rectal papillae, holds much the 
same relation to the tubules as formerly did the colon. 
The structure and character of the cells also remains essentially as described for the 
larva, though some points in this respect require to be considered. 
One such point is the decision as to whether in the imago at any stage the striated border 
of the cells is definitely of the brush type. That it is of this type is probable, since under dark- 
ground illumination the conspicuous brilliant white line bordering the lumen in the early 
larval stages is absent or only very imperfectly demonstrable. I have been unable, however, 
to see in any of the material examined the long ciliform processes one might have expected 
to see with such a form of striated border. Lecaillon has described such processes in the 
tubules of Culexpipiens, but gives no figures. Also he says that the filaments are of regular 
length and have the same appearance in the intestine and in the Malpighian tubules. 
Missiroli states that the cells in Anopheles claviger have a border of motionless ciliform 
appendages, but gives no specific data except in a diagram which shows much the same 
appearances as seen by me in the imago of A&les aegypti and which scarcely bear out what 
the statement signifies. So far I have not been able to find any later author who has 
definitely described at first hand long ciliform processes in the mosquito. 
Another point relates to the accumulation of urate excretion in the tubules. Roubaud 
noted the accumulation of urate deposit in the tubules of the larva of Anopheles under 
conditions of overcrowding and in the imago in hibernation and considered that this was 
a cyclical phenomenon. Missiroli, however, showed that such changes were the result of 
the organs being at rest, as during hibernation, or showing secretory activity as during 
digestion. He notes that in the first-mentioned condition the cells are swollen and loaded 
with granules which obscure the nucleus and the lumen. But when actively secreting the 
volume of the cells is reduced, the granules are cleared from the outer zone exposing the 
nuclei and the lumen is loaded with excretory matter. 
In AL;des aegypti the tubules in the early larval instars are clear and transparent and free 
from coarse granules. But during the fourth instar the tubules become milky white and 
opaque and so they remain throughout the pupal period and into the adult stage. In the 
female they remain so with little change throughout life. Only after a blood meal and at 
Figure 83. The excretory system. 
Camera lucida drawing of dissection of Malpighian tubules of imago. Coverglass preparation 
fixed Schaudinn’s fluid. The crosses indicate where a cell as described by Pantel in Ptychoptera 
is present. The two long outlying tubules are the ventro-lateral tubules. 
Dorsal view of the Malpighian tubules in the larva. Camera lucida drawing. a, ventro-lateral 
tubule; b, dorso-lateral tubule; c, dorsal tubule. 
Lateral view of Malpighian tubules in the imago. Reconstruction. Only the tubules of the 
left side are shown. Lettering as for 2. 
To show appearance of honey-comb type of striated border as seen under dark ground 
illumination. Early fourth instar larva. 
Transverse section of Malpighian tubule of adult showing interstitial cell as described by 
Pantel in Ptychoptera. a, normal epithelium cell of tubule; b, interstitial cell. 
As 5. 
Longitudinal section to show interstitial cell. Lettering as in 5. 
As 7. 
Lettering : Co, colon; Mg, mid-gut; Rc, rectum; V-VII, abdominal segments. 
668 
, @5 mm., , 0'05mm. , A a 
, 05mm. , 2 
/’ a 
b 7 8 
Figure 83 
669 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
the time when the insect is passing copious clear urine do the tubules show any marked 
change. At this time the lumen is enlarged and the cells, especially their inner portion, are 
less packed with granules. In some cases after oviposition, especially some days after, the 
tubules were reduced almost to the transparent condition seen in the early larval stages. 
But in others they were still heavily charged with granules. 
The granules are refractile, and vary in size from a fraction of a micron to four or up to 
eight microns. They give the appearance of small oil globules. They do not stain with 
Sudan black or easily with eosin or methylene blue. According to Wigglesworth (1942) in 
Rhodnius they are probably not the same as the urate deposit in the lumen and are not 
blackened by ammoniacal silver nitrate as are the granules of uric acid in the lumen. In 
&des aegypti in the fresh condition the granules in the cells as noted above have the 
appearance of fat globules. Secretion in the tubules, on the other hand, appears as amor- 
phous granular material. In sections the granules usually appear as small clear vacuoles, 
the Malpighian tubules as a result staining only very moderately in contrast to these organs 
seen in the fresh state or in mounted whole larvae. In sections stained by Holmes’ silver 
impregnation method, however, they stain an intense black. 
In the male the tubules are narrower than in the female, 4-7,~ as against 7-10,~ in the 
female. They also tend to run a straighter course and are often less packed with granules 
and more transparent. These differences are present also in the pupal stage and even in the 
late fourth instar larva, so much so that a rough diagnosis of sex can often be made in the 
mature larva by the appearance of the tubules. 
MECHANISM OF EXCRETION 
An important point in connection with the Malpighian tubules in insects is that in many 
insects, in addition to serving as organs of excretion, they play a role in the conservation 
of water and in the maintenance of the isotonicity of the haemolymph by abstracting water 
from the urine before its discharge. Patton (1953) recognises four types of tubule. In two 
of these, types B and D (cryptonephridic types), the tubules are organically connected in 
their terminal portions with the rectum and play a part in abstracting water from urine 
passed into this organ. In another two types, types A and C (cryptosolenic types), the 
tubules are not associated with the rectum in this manner. In type A the tubules are solely 
concerned in excretion, absorption of fluid from the excreta usually being a function of the 
rectum. In type C one portion of the tubule, the most proximal, has an excretory function, 
whilst a distal portion abstracts water from urine excreted by the proximal portion. The 
tubules in A. aegypti would appear most nearly to approximate to type A of Patton. 
The mechanism of excretion and the appearances given rise to have been very clearly 
shown by Wigglesworth (193 1) in the blood-sucking bug Rhodnius. The tubules in this 
case clearly come under type C. They consist of two quite distinctive portions, a proximal 
portion characterised by cells with striated border of honey-comb type and a lumen free 
from solid urate matter, and a distal portion in which the cells have a striated border of 
brush type and a lumen in which solid urate matter accumulates. After a blood meal, when 
for the first few hours the insect is secreting clear urine, both distal and proximal portions 
are distended with clear fluid. Other than this, the proximal portion shows no marked 
change and by the second day has returned to the normal condition. The distal portion is 
at first swept free from granules by the initial flow of fluid, but later shows newly formed 
urate crystals, which increase greatly in number, intermixed with many long ciliform 
670 
THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
filaments derived from the striated border. Later these filaments contract to the normal 
resting state, leaving the lumen packed with urate spheres and the cells with a striated 
border of the normal resting type. 
As shown by Wigglesworth the physiological explanation of these appearances is that in 
the upper proximal portion potassium or sodium urate is excreted in solution. In the lower 
portion water and alkali are reabsorbed leaving uric acid to crystallise out in characteristic 
spheres. The absorbed alkali is further available to combine with more uric acid produced 
in the tissues. 
Briefly then in A. aegypti it would seem that the tubules as a whole excrete and reabsorb 
water, or less likely, that the small portion of tubule forming the ascending part of the 
anterior loop, which differs somewhat in character from the rest, excretes and the rest of 
the tubule reabsorbs water. Against the latter view is the probability that in the mosquito 
the rectum with its large rectal papillae is more likely to be the mechanism for water 
absorption. Whatever the mechanism may be, it can easily be seen how in the mosquito 
small changes in conditions might give rise to different appearances. An example of this in 
the larva is given by Wigglesworth (1933). Thus in larvae of A. aegypti reared in salt water 
solid uric acid is seen in the Malpighian tubules making these white and opaque, but in the 
same larvae a few minutes after transfer to fresh water the tubules have been flushed out 
by water entering through the anal papillae. 
Pantel’s cells (Fig. 83 (l), (6), (8)). A feature of some interest that has so far not been 
noted is the occurrence in the Malpighian tubules of A. aegypti of occasional cells, differing 
from those forming the normal epithelium of the tubule, such as have been described by 
Pantel (1914) in Ptychoptera. In Ptychoptera these are thin cells, devoid of granules and 
without a striated border, that occur scattered among the normal epithelium. Similar cells 
devoid of granules are described by Missiroli in Anopheles. Those in AFdes aegypti occur 
at more or less regular intervals along the tubule. In sections they appear as thin flat cells 
with rather deeply-staining homogeneous cytoplasm and are devoid of any striated border. 
The nucleus is smaller and the chromatin more compact than that of the normal epi- 
thelium. In fact they are precisely similar to the cells as depicted in the figure by Pantel 
(Fig. 83 (6) b). In ALides aegypti they are well shown in the clear Malpighian tubules of the 
male in Schaudinn-fixed cover-glass preparations of the fresh dissected organs stained by 
acid fuchsin. They are usually situated opposite to a normal epithelial cell, that is in the gap 
between the two cells facing this on the opposite side of the tubule (Fig. 83 (6), (7)). They 
have been supposed to serve some function. It seems possible that they are the nuclei of 
cells responsible for forming the basement membrane of the tubule, a small portion of 
cytoplasm left in the neighbourhood of the nucleus giving rise to the appearance of a cell. 
Fat-body and nephrocytes. These have already been described in the sections dealing with 
the circulatory system and associated tissues. 
(i) THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION (Fig.84) 
The segmental parts composing the external genitalia of the female have already been 
described. It remains to describe the internal organs of generation, namely the gonads and 
efferent ducts with their accessory structures. 
671 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
A very full account of the histology of the female reproductive system in insects is given 
by Gross (1903).* On the female organs in Nematocera are : Miall and Hammond (1900, 
Chironomus) ; Bodenheimer (1923, Tipula) ; Abul-Nasr (1950, post-embryonic development 
and structure in Chironomus, Anisopus and Mycetophilidae). 
Of early papers describing the female organs in the mosquito are : Lecaillon (1900, ovary 
of Culex pipiens) ; Grandpre and Charmoy (1900) ; Christophers (1901, 1923) ; Kulagin 
(1901) ; Neveu-Lemaire (1902, spermathecae) ; Eysell (1924) ; Herms and Freeborn (1921, 
mechanism of egg-laying) ; der Brelje (1924, comparative study of the female organs in 
different Culicidae). A more recent anatomical and histological study of the female 
reproductive system and follicular development in AkYes aegypti is that by Parks (1955). 
On the changes in the egg follicle are : Christophers (19 11, Anopheles) ; Nicholson (192 1, 
a very complete account of follicular structure in Anopheles) ; Vishna Nath (1924, 1929, the 
egg follicle and Golgi apparatus in Culex); Christophers, Sinton and Cove11 (1939, includes 
abstract of Christophers, 1911, with original figures) ; Hosoi (1954, growth and degenera- 
tion of ovarian follicles in Culex pipiens pallens Coq.) ; Gillies (1954, 1955, Anopheles). 
On the oviducts and changes indicative of age are: Mer (1932, 1936) ; Almazova (1935) ; 
Polodova (1941, all on Anopheles); Roy and Majundar (1939, Culex fatigans). A study 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 * See also Snodgrass (1933, 1935), Weber (1933), Imms (1938), Wigglesworth (1942). 
Figure 84. The female reproductive system. I 
Dorsal view of female organs two days from emergence. The drawing is from a dissection 
made from a fixed and hardened whole female. 
Transverse section of ovary. a, nucleated peritoneal membrane; b, membrane surrounding 
lumen. 
Germarium and forming follicle at upper end of an ovariole. 
Section showing follicles at emergence. 
Section showing follicles 21 hours after a blood meal. The lower follicle has increased greatly 
in size, the succeeding follicle remains much as at emergence. The stage in the lower follicle 
is a little beyond stage 2 as in a fresh preparation the nucleus would be obscured by the yolk 
granules. 
Sagittal section at about the median line of the body, showing structures in the region of the 
genital opening. The spermatheca contains spermatozoa. Ventral to the genital opening the 
section passes through the sclerite referred to in the text as possibly representing the female 
gonapophyses. 
Dissection showing the spermathecae and spermathecal ducts. 
Coronal section showing arrangement of the spermathecae. The section corresponds to one 
passing logitudinally in a plane at right-angles to Fig. 84 (6) through the spermatheca and 
vagina as there shown. 
Transverse section of spermathecal duct. 
Posterior portion of first instar larva, showing early ovary in segment VI. 
Ovarian rudiment in pre-ecdysis third instar larva. a, outer layer of cells; b, commencing 
follicle formation. 
Lettering : at, atrium; cod, common oviduct; cs, caecus; cw, cowl; Jep, follicular epithelium; 
fol, lower follicle ; fol’, preceding follicle; grn, germarium; lo, lateral oviduct ; mst, mesodermal 
strand; nsc, nurse cells; ooc, oocyte; ov, ovary; ovl, ovariole wall ; pdo, pedicel; pgp, postgenital 
plate; Rc, rectum; slg, suspensory ligament; spd, spermathecal duct; spm, spermatheca; vg, 
vagina; y, yolk granules; VIII’, hollow behind sternite VIII at bottom of which is the genital 
opening. 
672 

EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
of insemination and the bursal pouch in Ai;des aegypti is given by Hayes (1953). A recent 
important paper by Miillring (1956) figures the ovary of Culex (autogenous and anauto- 
genous) as seen by phase contrast and gives much information regarding ovarian structure 
and development. 
The female generative organs in the mosquito consist of the gonads, ovaries (Fig. 84 
(1) ov) situated one on each side dorso-laterally in the hinder part of the abdomen, the 
paired or lateral oviducts (lo), one on each side passing from the ovary to the median 
common oviduct (cod), which in turn is continued into a short vagina (vg) and still more 
distally into the atrium (at). Into the vagina also open the ducts from the three sperma- 
thecae (spm) and into the atrium the caecus (colleterial or accessory gland) (Fig. 84 (6), (7) 
cs). 
The ovary (Fig. 84 (l-6)). The ovary is a fusiform structure situated when undeveloped 
in the fifth and sixth abdominal segments, but when fully developed with mature follicles 
occupying the greater part of the distended abdomen. Anteriorly it is continued as a fine 
filament, the suspensory ligament (slg), which in AFdes aegypti can be traced to the posterior 
end of the fourth segment where it is attached to the body wall in the region of the alary 
muscle. Posteriorly the ovary joins the lateral oviduct, its lumen being continuous with 
that in the latter structure. The ovary lies free in the haemocoele and receives large tracheal 
branches from the spiracle complexes of segments V and VI. 
Covering the ovary externally is a thin membranous coat with small scattered nuclei, the 
peritoneal membrane (Fig. 84 (2) a). Lining the rather wide central lumen is a similar thin 
nucleated membrane ((2) b). Between the two membranes are some lOO-12O~foZZicuZar tubes 
or ovarioles (fol). These take origin from the inner aspect of the peritoneal membrane and 
pass downwards and inwards to the wall of the central lumen. Each consists of an outer 
tube of thin membrane formed of flattened cells which at the inner end of the ovariole is 
continuous with the wall of the central lumen (Fig. 84 (4)). Lying within and distinct 
from the tube is a column of germinative cells, the ‘egg-string’ of Nicholson. In the apical 
portion of the tube the cells in the column are still largely undifferentiated, forming the 
germarium (Fig. 84 (3) gm). Distal to this part the column consists of a succession of 
developing follicles, each of which, circumstances permitting, will become an egg, the 
vitellarium (Fig. 84 (4) fol’, ,foZ). Between each successive follicle is a portion of the 
column in which the cells are compacted forming a short solid connecting-piece. A similar 
cord distal to the lowest follicle is referred to in the literature as the pedicel (Fig. 84 (4) pdo). 
Each follicle consists of eight cells surrounded by a single cell layer, the follicular 
epithelium (Fig. 84 (5) f.ep). Of the eight cells, seven are the nurse cells performing a 
nutritive function, and one, the most distally situated in the follicle, is the oocyte or future 
ovum (Fig. 84 (4), (5) ooc). The lowest follicle is the most advanced in development, very 
greatly so when final development proceeding to egg formation is in progress. Usually two, 
or at most three, recognisable follicles are present in A. aegypti in each ovariole. The lowest 
follicle throughout the ovary is always approximately in the same stage of development. 
The ovary of the mosquito is peculiar in that it does not consist, as in many insects, of 
separate individual ovarioles, but of a large number of ovarioles bound into a single organ 
by a thin containing membrane, which is therefore not correctly termed the tunicapropria, 
this term being that applied to the outer covering of an ovariole. Nor do the upper ends 
of the ovarioles combine to form the suspensory ligament, but take origin from the peri- 
toneal membrane along the length of the ovary. The correctness of the term ovariole has 
674 
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
indeed to be considered. It is stated by Imms, making reference to Henneguy, that in 
Chironomus, Anopheles and some Braconidae, although there is a differentiation into 
follicles, ovarioles are wanting. The use of the term ovariole, however, seems justified, even 
though the tubules lodging the germinative cells in the mosquito are possibly an adventitious 
tissue, since the column of germinative cells closely resembles that of insects with free ovarioles. 
More important is the fact that some confusion seems to exist in the literature regarding 
the term follicular epithelium in the mosquito. This term is correctly applied to the layer of 
cells surrounding the follicle. It is, however, sometimes used as though the cells covering 
the follicle and those lining or forming the walls of the ovariole were identical. The folli- 
cular epithelium surrounding the follicle is already part of the future egg of which it will 
form the chorion and has, when first seen, already lost all connection with the ovariole wall. 
In AFdes aegypti early development in the pupa clearly shows that the walls of the ovariole 
are formed around the columns of germinative cells from interstitial cells of the ovary 
(Fig. 84 (4) ovl). 
A conspicuous feature of the ovary in the pupa and imago is the abundant tracheal 
supply and large size of the tracheal vessels. As noted by Nicholson large tracheae form 
coiled masses at the base of the ovarioles to allow for eventual extension of the tracheae with 
growth of the follicles. Nicholson also notes the presence of tracheal cells andleashes of 
tracheal capillaries devoid of taenidia. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE OVARY (Fig. 84(10),(11)) 
The ovary of insects develops from thickenings of the mesoderm of the splanchnic wall 
constituting the genital ridges. In the cockroach columns of cells are formed which pass 
from the genital ridge on the coelomic wall to a ventral strand continuous with the oviduct 
rudiment. These columns become the ovarioles and eventually appear as opening in series 
into the proximal portion of the lateral oviduct. A close approach to this primitive condi- 
tion in Nematocera is seen in Mycetophila (see Abul-Nasr, Fig. 26). In the mosquito the 
lumen of the ovary would appear to represent this proximal portion of the oviduct rudi- 
ment. It is continuous with the lumen of the lateral oviduct developed from the meso- 
dermal strand and in an early stage as seen in the pupa the lumen of the ovary tends to lie 
nearer the internal face of the organ with the young follicles situated for the most part on 
its external side. 
In the first instar larva the ovary is a small body, measuring about 60,~ in length, situated 
in the sixth abdominal segment. It is formed of a small group of cells resembling germ cells 
with some smaller cells at its periphery. By the second instar the organ has increased to 
about 70,~ with much the same characters. In the third instar it is a small fusiform body 
about 150,~ in length (Fig. 84 (11)). It is continued anteriorly as a fine filament traceable 
to the intersegmental region IV-V and continued posteriorly as a thicker filament, the 
mesodermal strand (mst), which ends blindly towards the posterior end of segment VI. 
The body of the organ at this stage consists of a mass of cells some of which form a rather 
regular layer one cell deep at the surface. Among the cells in the interior are some larger 
cells which show indications of early follicular formation. The organ is solid with no lumen. 
Towards the end of the fourth instar the body of the ovary measures about O-3 mm. 
and extends into the fifth segment. The mesodermal strand is rather thick and somewhat 
clubbed. It has a lumen continuous with that now passing through the length of the ovary. 
The ovary now has a thin outer nucleated membrane that appears to be distinct from the 
675 43-2 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
peripheral layer of cells previously noted, which is still recognisable in parts. In the central 
portion are groups of cells forming early follicles lying in spaces in a matrix of smaller 
cells. The organ is noticeably solid and compact, not extended as in the pupal stage with 
enlarged tracheal vessels and the follicles widely separated. 
In the pupa the ovary has much the appearance of the organ in the young imago with a 
central lumen and follicles throughout its whole length. Towards the end of the pupal stage 
the follicles have already taken on their characteristic appearance. There is a lower 
follicle about 25,~ long and 20,~ broad with well-marked nurse cells and oocyte, the latter 
sometimes distinguishable by its clear nucleus and marked nucleolus. Proximal to this 
lower follicle is a second follicle and sometimes indications of a third. Between successive 
follicles there is a connecting column of rather flattened cells. A feature very clearly shown 
at this stage is the column of cells forming the pedicel passing from the lower follicle to the 
wall of the central lumen. The exact relation of the pedicel to the wall of the lumen at this 
stage is, however, difficult to ascertain owing to the aggregation of nuclei about the central 
lumen. It seems probable that there is no actual opening, and that there is a cellular 
block at the distal end of the ovariole, the wall of the ovariole and the wall of the lumen 
being confluent with the substance of the pedicel. Surrounding the follicle, but distinct 
and separated by a space, is the thin membranous ovariole wall. The follicle is already 
surrounded by the layer of rather flattened cells that will later develop into the charac- 
teristic follicular epithelium. 
For some time following emergence the ovary still remains only about O-6 mm. long 
with the appearances as described in the pupa. By the fifth day, or later, in the absence of 
a blood meal, it has increased at most to 1.0 mm. in length and extends to the fourth 
segment. There are two, or at most three, follicles in each ovariole, the lowest of which has 
not developed beyond stage 2 as described in the next section. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE FOLLICLE 
In the early follicle the nurse cells and oocyte are similar in appearance, the oocyte always 
being situated distal to the nurse cells. At emergence or shortly after, however, the oocyte 
becomes conspicuously different by reason of its clear nucleus and prominent nucleolus 
in contrast with the rather diffusely stained and much enlarged nuclei of the nurse cells 
apparently lacking a nucleolus. In the fresh condition the oocyte at this stage is still free 
from granules in the cytoplasm. But shortly afterwards fine granules appear and these are 
followed by large characteristic yolk granules. As development proceeds the oocyte 
increases in size, its cytoplasm becoming densely packed with yolk granules, so that it 
successively occupies half, three-quarters and later practically the whole of the much 
enlarged follicle. The follicle at first retains its oval shape, but eventually it elongates, 
taking on more and more the shape of the egg. The nurse cells, which for a time remain 
very much of their original size and appearance as compared with the rapidly growing 
oocyte, become eventually inconspicuous bodies at the anterior end of the egg. The 
follicular epithelium which first appears as rather flattened cells becomes, as the follicle 
increases in size, more and more epithelium-like eventually forming a definite epithelium of 
cubical cells. As the follicle elongates to take on the shape of the egg, the follicular epi- 
thelium shows changes preparatory to the formation of the chorion and eventually forms 
the egg-shell. 
676 
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
With due regard to temperature and other modifying conditions the above changes have 
been much used in determining the age, relation to blood meal and other biological data 
in Anopheles captured under different natural conditions. For this purpose the following 
stages have been made use of: 
Stage 1. 
Stage 2. 
nucleus. 
Stage 3. 
shape. 
Stage 4. 
Stage 5. Cytoplasm of the oocyte free from granules. 
Yolk granules present in the cytoplasm of the oocyte, but not entirely hiding the 
The nucleus of the oocyte is obscured by yolk granules, but the follicle is still oval in 
The follicle is elongate and more or less the shape of the future egg. 
Chorionic structure is shown. 
Stage 1 is only seen in the newly emerged mosquito and indicates that nearby breeding is 
in progress. Stage 2 may be seen in a mosquito that has emerged some time previously but 
has not yet fed on blood, or one that has fed but oviposited and has not since had a blood 
meal unless a very recent one. Usually if a blood meal has been taken the ovary will have 
advanced beyond stage 2. The most important fact is that in the absence of a blood meal 
development of the follicle does not proceed beyond stage 2. 
The extent to which development takes place in the absence of a blood meal has been 
studied by Mer (1936) in Anopheles e&us. It has been shown that it is dependent upon the 
extent to which available reserves are present. Thus in A. elutus development up to stage 2 
can be achieved either at the expense of reserves carried over from the larval stage or by 
feeding on raisins. One blood meal will then suffice for oviposition. With poor larval food, 
as at the onset of adverse conditions prior to hibernation, development to stage 2 is im- 
paired and a single blood meal does not suffice. Hecht (1933) also records that feeding on 
sugar stimulates egg maturation in Anopheles macuhpennis previously fed on blood. In 
Ai;des aegypti reared under reasonably good conditions a single blood meal is normally 
adequate for oviposition. 
The nuclear changes in the oocyte and nurse cells have been described by Nicholson in 
, Anopheles and by Vishna Nath (1924) in CuZex ,fatigans. In the latter species when the 
mosquito feeds on blood the oocyte quickly becomes differentiated from the nurse cells 
by a prominent nucleolus in a clearly defined nucleus. Later the nucleus of the oocyte 
enlarges and after extruding a small mass of chromatin threads (chromatin residue of 
Nicholson) eventually disorganises in the yolk. The extruded chromatin becomes the 
female pronucleus situated at the anterior pole of the egg. 
The granules in the oocyte are described by Vishna Nath (1929). They are of two kinds 
only, namely large solid granules of proteid nature macrospheres, measuring about 2-4~ 
and small drop-like granules, microspheres, containing free fat. No evidence of mito- 
chondria was found by this author. Under the centrifuge the macrospheres and fatty 
microspheres (Golgi vesicles) pass to opposite sides. A certain number of microspheres 
that do not contain fat remain with the cytoplasm in the intermediate zone. 
The character of the chromosomes is dealt with in a later section. 
THE FEMALE EFFERENT SYSTEM (Fig. 84(1),(6-9)) 
The homologies of the different parts of the female efferent system in the mosquito have 
been much clarified by the developmental studies of Abul-Nasr on different Nematocerous 
families. It would appear that in the early larval stage in both sexes there are on each side 
677 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
two mesodermal strands one passing from the ovary or testis to the seventh segment and 
one to the ninth segment. In the female the latter disappears before adult life and in the 
male the former. The lateral oviducts may be developed from the female mesodermal 
strands, or with the backward growth of the ovary and shortening of the mesodermal strands 
the mesodermal tissue may be replaced or reinforced by ectodermal tissue from the common 
oviduct invagination. The common oviduct, spermathecae and a vaginal apodeme, when this 
structure is present, all arise from separate invaginations taking origin from a cavity 
formed by the fusion of the peripodial cavities of two imaginal buds which appear ventrally 
on each side of the middle line behind the seventh sternite. The caecus is formed from an 
invagination that takes origin from a cavity formed by fusion of a pair of imaginal buds on 
the ventral surface of the ninth sternite of the larva. The original peripodial cavities are 
eventually included in a common depression, the atrium. 
In ALides aegypti the mesodermal strand in the female passing to the posterior end of the 
seventh segment is already present in the third instar larva. Whether there is at any stage 
a second strand has still to be determined. The lateral oviducts appear to be entirely of 
mesodermal origin being formed wholly from the mesodermal strands, the swollen ends of 
which can still be recognised after joining up with the common oviduct. In accord with this 
view is the fact that, whereas the lumen of the lateral oviduct at emergence is openly 
continuous with that of the ovary, there is still a block, even after the parts have fused, for 
some time in the lumen at the. point of junction. 
In .AnopheZes there are dilatations at the points of junction of the lateral oviducts with 
the common oviduct that have been termed ampullae and the size and shape of these dilata- 
tions have been used in determining whether a female has previously oviposited or not. 
According to Mer (1932) the ampullae in Anopheles elutus in the nulliparous female are 
small and well delimited from the common oviduct, but not from one another. But after 
ovipositions they are increased in size and clearly divided from each other. They also have 
the appearance of being more a part of the common oviduct at the expense of the lateral 
oviducts which have become shorter. For measurement the author uses a figure obtained 
by multiplying the cross and longitudinal diameters taken at right angles. Almazova and 
later Polodova have also used this method for A. maculipennis var. atroparvus and some 
other varieties of this species, as also for A. claviger and A. superpictus. The last-mentioned 
author notes that the parts should be measured in saline isotonic for the mosquito whilst 
still pulsating and at intervals between the pulsations, or in saline with a narcotic to prevent 
pulsations. Female atroparvus newly emerged gave a figure of O*Ol mm.? After one ovi- 
position the figure was 0.02 mrn2, after two ovipositions 0*028 mm.2 and after three 
0.03 1 mm.2. 
In Ai;des aegypti dissected in Ringer’s fluid at O-7 per cent salinity the dilatations at the 
junction of the lateral oviducts with the common oviduct were much less marked than 
described in Anopheles, giving a figure of only OGO4 mm. 2. Also such increase in size and 
appearance as was noted after oviposition did not suggest that the test could be usefully 
used in the case of this species. Further observations on this point are, however, desirable.* 
The lateral oviducts (Fig. 84 (1) lo) are tubular with rather thin walls. They have an inner 
lining of small rather flattish cells and a thin coat of muscular fibres, chiefly circular. 
* Recently Gillies (1956) has described in Anopheles gambiae a new character for recognition of recently fertilised 
females, a mating-plug of translucent material in the common oviduct derived from the male and absorbed in 
36 hours from fertilisation. 
678 
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
The common oviduct (cod) is very similar in appearance to the lateral oviducts but 
broader. It has an inner lining of cubical epithelium, external to which is a coat of longi- 
tudinal and circular muscle fibres, the former for the most part internal. It lies close 
behind the eighth sternite passing backwards to its posterior border and then making 
a sharp bend at right-angles dorsally to join the vagina. 
The vagina (vg), unlike the common oviduct, has a thick transparent cuticular intima. 
Its proximal portion is dilated forming a well-marked chamber with a thick pad-like roof. 
Its distal portion is thrown into a sharp transverse fold just beyond which are the openings 
of the spermathecal ducts and caecus. There is then a short terminal portion ending at the 
genital opening as described later with a small posterior cul de sac. How much of the 
cavity is to be regarded as atrium is uncertain. 
The spermathecae (Fig. 84 (7), (8)) are situated in segment VIII. They are three in number 
a larger one situated medianly and a smaller one on each side of and slightly posterior 
to this. All three lie close to the sternite, the median spermatheca with its ventral aspect in 
contact with the common oviduct. Each sperrnatheca consists of an almost perfectly 
spherical shell of dark sclerotised cuticular substance. Covering the greater part of this 
externally is a very thin cellular layer with scattered small flattened nuclei. At or near the 
posterior pole is a thickened plaque of larger cells through the middle of which the 
spermathecal duct takes off abruptly. In the unfertilised female the sperrnathecae are 
empty of cellular contents, but after fertilisation they are filled with a mass of spermatozoa. 
The spermathecal ducts (spd) take origin abruptly from the spermathecal globes. They 
loop dorsally and then, bending ventrally, enter the vagina as described above. The duct 
from the median spermatheca remains distinct and enters the atrium independently of the 
others. The ducts from the two lateral spermathecae join a little before their termination to 
form a short length of common duct which enters close to, but separately from, the duct of 
the median spermatheca. The ducts have a very narrow lumen, less than 2.0,~ in diameter. 
This is surrounded by a very thick clear sclerotised intima, external to which is a closely 
packed layer of cells with darkly staining nuclei and, scattered somewhat irregularly on 
the outer surface of this layer, there are larger cells possibly glandular in nature. The ducts 
give the appearance of being narrow rigid tubes incapable of expansion and, seeing that 
their lumen is so narrow, it is remarkable that the spermatozoa apparently so rapidly gain 
entry to the spermathecae. It is unusual to find a mass of spermatozoa still present in any 
other part of the efferent system. The ducts end abruptly where they enter the vagina with- 
out any special thickening or other noticeable structural feature. This may lead to the more 
conspicuous entry of the caecal duct being mistaken for that of a common spermathecal 
duct (see the duct marked in the genital opening in Fig. 84 (1) which is that of the caecus, 
not the less conspicuous spermathecal duct openings). 
The caecus (cs) in A. aepypti is a relatively small structure with the characters of a mucus 
gland. It lies close to and ventral to the rectum and its duct opens just posterior to the 
spermathecal ducts. The terminal portion of the duct is sclerotised, forming a short length 
of rigid tube with a terminal ring-like thickening. 
The genital opening (Fig. 84 (l), (6)). A word may be said regarding the genital opening, 
especially as some confusion has occurred in the literature over the structure termed the 
in&a. In A. aegypti the parts are rather complicated by the extent to which the terminal 
segments are intussuscepted. This gives rise to a deep pouch between the eighth sternite 
and the postgenital plate that must be distinguished from the atrium. At the bottom of 
679 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
this pouch, that is at its anterior end, is the characteristic wide transverse genital opening as 
seen, for example, in Anopheles (Christophers, 1923). This has a bow-shaped sclerite corre- 
sponding to the cowl in Anopheles bordering its posterior edge and a sclerotised ridge 
forming its anterior lip. This ridge has on each side a sclerotised hairy plate and in the 
mid-line between these is a small, not very conspicuous, hairy area which is clearly the 
insula as described in Anopheles where it is more developed. Where the lips meet at each 
corner of the opening there is the small characteristic ribbon-like thickening which leaves 
no doubt as to the identity of the opening, which is in almost every particular similar to 
that in Anopheles and Culex. In Agdes aegypti, however, it lies hidden in the outer pouch- 
like hollow beneath the seventh sternite (Fig. 84 (6)). 
In A. aegypti the atrium is not large and it is difficult, as already noted, to say how much 
of the cavity should be considered this structure and how much vagina. On its roof open 
the spermathecal ducts and the caecus. In the forms studied by Abul-Nasr there crosses the 
roof between these respective openings a structure homologised by this author as the ninth 
sternite and termed by him the insula. It should be pointed out, however, that the insula, 
as so named in Anopheles, is a structure on the anterior lip of the genital opening and 
therefore quite distinct from the insula of Abul-Nasr. The position of the ninth sternite 
would appear to be correctly as assigned by Abul-Nasr. The insula on the lip of the genital 
opening cannot be the ninth sternite since the female opening would then be posterior to 
the ninth sternite, which is very improbable. The sclerotisations on the lip are, however, 
very suggestive of some segmental structure and it is just possible that the lateral plates in 
A. aegypti, which are hairy, represent in a very obsolescent form the first ovipositor valves 
(anterior gonapophyses), which in many insects are situated in this position, that is just 
posterior to the eighth sternite. 
(j) THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION (Fig.85(1)) 
The internal organs of generation in the male consist of the two gonads, testes (te), a long 
thin duct (vd) passing from each testis to a median rather flask-shaped structure (ejd) which 
is continued distally as a short median duct passing to the intromittent organ (Ph) and two 
sac-like bodies (ag) that open by short ducts on each side at the base of this. The nomen- 
clature of the parts requires consideration. 
According to Snodgrass (1935) ducts passing from the testicular tubules to a common 
duct are vasa efirentia, the common ducts on each side being the vasa deferentia. The 
lower portions of the vasa deferentia may be swollen, forming the vesiculae seminales, and 
the median duct into which the vasa deferentia open distally is the ductus ejaculatorius. In 
association with the ductus ejaculatorius there may be accessory glands. Prashad (19 16), 
who describes and figures the male genital organs in Anopheles willmori, CuZex fatigans, 
Ak;des (Stegomyia) scutellaris, Ai;des (Ochlerotatus) pseudotaeniatus and Theobaldia 
spathipalpis, finds the organs in all except Anopheles to agree in general characters and his 
descriptions would cover that given above for Ai;des aegypti. The ducts leading from the 
testes he terms vasa deferentia, there being he considers no difference in this case between 
the vasa eferentia and the vasa deferentia. The median organ into which these open he 
terms the sacculus ejaculatorius and the swollen portions of the vasa deferentia where they 
680 
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
enter this organ he names the receptacuza seminis. The lateral sac-like bodies are the 
accessory glands and the short passage leading to the genital opening is the ductus ejacu- 
Zatorius. Abul-Nasr finds the efferent system in the families of Nematocera studied by him 
to be formed in part from the mesodermal strands and in part from. ectodermal invagi- 
nations. In accordance with this he terms the ducts from the testes vasa efirentia or vasa 
deferentia depending upon the source from which they are derived. The ectodermal parts 
commence as a median invagination starting from what will be the gonopore. This forms 
the penis cavity (it may in some forms, for example Tipula, be ballooned into a cavity or 
may take the form of a median duct). From the anterior end of the penis cavity there 
arise twin invaginations which become the ejaculatory duct rudiments. These later become 
differentiated, their proximal parts becoming glandular and forming the vesiculae 
seminales, whilst their distal parts retain their duct-like character and become joined 
together in a common muscular coat as the ejaculatory ducts. 
In selecting appropriate terms for the parts in AL;des aegypti it seems more in keeping 
with taxonomy to name the ducts leading from the testes the vasa deferentia, in spite of the 
fact that they appear to be derived from the mesodermal strands. The median organ into 
which they open, which clearly consists of two fused lateral components, appears to 
represent the vesiculae seminales. For reasons that will be obvious later it would seem, how- 
ever, convenient when referring to the structure as a whole to retain Prashad’s term 
sacculus ejaculatorius. The short duct leading from the sacculus to the phallosome, at the 
base of which short ducts enter from the sac-like bodies, would seem to be the penis cavity 
and the sac-like bodies are obviously accessory glands. See Addenda, p. 7 19. 
For literature dealing with the male organs as a whole, other than those authors already 
mentioned, see: Dufour (1851, first to note the testes in the mosquito) ; Hurst (1890, early 
description of the testes with note that the hinder end of the testes seem to take the place 
of the vesiculae seminales) ; Kulagin (1907, histology of the male organs) ; Imms (1908, 
references to testes in the larva) ; Adie (19 12, pigmented testes in differentiation of sex in 
Anopheles larvae) ; Christophers (1922, development). See also authors mentioned later 
in section dealing with development of spermatozoa. 
THE TESTES (Fig. 85 (2), (3)) 
The testes in the imago at emergence are fusiform bodies measuring about 0.4 mm. in 
length and O-1 mm. in greatest breadth and situated on each side in the sixth abdominal 
segment. Later they become more swollen and extend some distance into the seventh 
segment. They lie internal to the peripheral fat-body and, as in previous stages of the life 
history, are surrounded by a thick coat of special fat-body. Distally they are continued into 
the vasa deferentia, but proximally they have no definite suspensory ligament as has the 
ovary. 
Externally there is a thin nucleated membrane. Lomen (19 14) in CuZex describes the 
outer covering as double, a thick connective tissue layer and an inner tunic lining. Within 
the outer membrane are stratified zones of developing spermatozoa that give to the testis, 
whether in the fresh condition or in sections, a very characteristic appearance. Apically 
there is a portion consisting of more or less undifferentiated sexual cells. There follow 
alternate bands showing various stages in development of the spermatozoa as described 
later and, occupying the distal third or more of the organ, a mass of mature or nearly 
681 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
mature spermatozoa. At emergence the passage into the vas deferens is blocked by a mass 
of secretion at the distal end of the testis. Proximal to this spermatozoa tend to be arranged 
more or less circularly with the heads towards the surface so that in tangential sections the 
long thin deeply stained heads are seen, while sections passing deeper tend to show the 
heads in cross-section near the periphery, the more central portions appearing as a mass of 
granules, many of which are composed of tails cut in cross-section. In older males the 
greater part of the testis contains mature or nearly mature spermatozoa and the lower 
portion may be much swollen with accumulation of these forms, so that as observed by 
Hurst the lower part of the testes appeared to function as the vesiculae seminales. 
THE MALE EFFERENT SYSTEM (Fig.85(1),(4-8)) 
The vasa deferentia in the newly emerged mosquito are extremely long and thin. Their 
walls consist of a layer of epithelium (Fig. 85 (5)), but are devoid of obvious muscle fibres, 
though jerky vermicular movements of their lower ends may be seen when the parts are 
dissected in Ringer’s solution. Later, when packed with spermatozoa, they become thicker 
and shorter. Each joins the ejaculatory duct of its side at the proximal end of the sacculus. 
I have not found the lower ends significantly swollen to form vesiculae seminales, even in 
males several days old. 
8 
9 
10 Figure 85. The male reproductive system. 
Dorsal view of the male organs shortly after emergence. 
Section showing testis in fourth instar larva. Most of the organ is in the stage of develop- 
ment corresponding to b in no. 3. The organ is surrounded by fat-body. 
Sagittal section of anterior portion (about one-quarter) of testis half an hour from emergence. 
a, region of spermatogonia; b, region of developing spermatocytes; c, region of chromosome 
reduction ; d, region of developing spermatozoa (spermatids) : shows internal portion largely 
with granules and tails of spermatids. At the periphery are groups of spermatid nuclei for 
the most part cut transversely as at Fig. 85 (9) A, some cut longitudinally are as at Fig. 85 
(9) B. The remaining three-quarters of the testis are very similar to d, but with some more 
mature spermatozoa at the posterior end. As yet no spermatozoa have passed into the vas 
deferens. 
Sagittal section showing relation of ejaculatory ducts and accessory gland to genital opening 
in phallosome. 
Showing structure of the vas deferens. 
The same for the ejaculatory duct. 
Dissection showing conjoined ejaculatory ducts swollen with longitudinally arranged 
motionless spermatozoa in three days’ old male. a, active spermatozoa in thickened vas 
deferens; b, swollen ejaculatory ducts; c, stream of spermatozoa escaping from rupture. 
Three spermatocytes. 
Appearances shown by nuclei of spermatids. A, ring forms of early spermatid nuclei in 
transverse section; B, the same in longitudinal section; c, cross-sections of more mature 
forms. 
Mature spermatozoa from spermatheca of female as seen under dark-ground illumination 
represented in black, the heads being the more brightly illuminated. Camera lucida drawings 
after cessation of undulatory movement of the tails. 
Lettering: ag, accessory gland; ejd, conjoined ejaculatory ducts (sacculus ejaculatorius); 
pea, penis cavity; P/i, phallosome; te, testis; vd, vas deferencs. 
682 
. . U *..a* 8 B 
1 O-01mm.1 IOQlmm.1 9 5 IO-05mm.l 3 
Figure 85 
683 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
The ejaculatory ducts together form the sacculus ejaculatorius of Prashad. It has a 
median longitudinal mark indicating its dual composition. It lies ventral to the bulged 
bases of the accessory glands appearing in sagittal section as shown in Fig. 85 (5). Its 
walls have an epithelial lining, external to which is a coat of stout circular muscle fibres 
(Fig. 85 (6)). 
In the newly emerged mosquito the sacculus ejaculatorius is empty as also is the whole 
of the efferent male passage. But after opening up of the passage to the vasa deferentia it 
becomes packed with spermatozoa, apparently lying longitudinally so that the organ has 
a striated appearance. The spermatozoa, before the organ is ruptured, are motionless. 
On rupture of its wall, however, these issue in a massed stream, the spermatozoa becoming 
active as they cease to be tightly packed. The mass of spermatozoa so collected in the 
sacculus is very great, causing this organ to be swollen to twice or more its original size 
and there can be no doubt that it functions as a vesicula seminalis (Fig. 85 (7)). It seems 
undesirable, however, on morphological grounds to give it this name, which has been used 
as already noted for other parts of the efferent system in the mosquito and Prashad’s name 
seems preferable. 
The accessory glands are large conical sac-like organs. They possess a central lumen 
and walls lined by columnar epithelial cells the cytoplasm of which is loaded with globules 
of secretion. They appear to be purely glandular in nature and do not contain spermatozoa 
at any stage. 
The penis cavity is a short duct passing into the phallosome and opening at the genital 
pore within this organ. 
The spermatozoa (Fig. 85 (7-10)) as present in the spermatheca of the female or in the 
male parts are well shown in the living condition under dark-ground illumination. They 
show well also in smears stained by Heidenhain’s haematoxylin with counterstain or by 
Holmes’ silver impregnation method. Their development and chromosome structure has 
been very fully studied and described by Lomen in Culex pipiens: see also Stevens (19 10, 
19 11) and Taylor (19 14). None of these authors, however, appears to have given a figure 
or description of the spermatozoon of the mosquito as a whole. Seen as noted above they 
consist of a long thin refractile and dark-staining head measuring about 40-45,~ and a very 
long less refractile and lighter-staining tail measuring up to 200,~ or more in length. In 
thickness the head measures little more than a micron. It is somewhat thinner in front, 
gradually thickening towards its hinder end. No middle piece is to be made out, the tail 
continuing on from the head. In living material the head exhibits little or no undulatory 
movement and usually appears straight as shown in the figure. The long tail, on the other 
hand, exhibits wave-like undulatory movements which under particular conditions appear 
more or less to synchronise in different individuals. Sometimes the undulations are more 
rapid and extensive than usual and it has been noted that this may occur when near an air 
bubble. In cover-glass preparations the undulations eventually cease, the tail remaining in 
its wavy condition as shown in the figure. Where the spermatozoa are massed, movement 
may be much like a flowing stream. In spite of the undulating tail, very little forward 
movement is made by isolated individuals and it was thought that possibly narrow ducts 
like those of the spermathecae might favour progression by giving purchase to the tail 
undulations. 
Development of the spermatozoon in Culex has been described in considerable detail by 
Lomen, but only a brief account can here be given. The following is the development in 
684 
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
broad outline. The cells destined to become spermatozoa, spermatogonia, occupy the 
extreme anterior end of the testis (Fig. 85 (3) a). An apical cell, as present in some insects, 
has not been noted in the present case. The spermatogonia divide repeatedly, forming masses 
of cells, spermatocytes, which become included in a membranous cyst wall formed by 
somatic cells whose somewhat flattened nuclei may be seen in the earlier cysts. The number 
of spermatocytes enclosed in a single cyst may in some forms be as many as 256 (the result 
of eight consectutive divisions) (Wigglesworth, 1942). In Ai;des aegypti testis this would 
appear to be about the number in the larger groups. The cyst wall in the larger groups may 
be very thin or not apparent, but the groups as they pass down the testis largely retain their 
individuality. As they do so they tend to become flattened and form stratified lines of 
spermatocytes that give the testis its characteristic appearance. Eventually the spermato- 
cytes undergo two meiotic divisions with reduction of the chromosomes, the zones so formed 
being characterised by the appearances shown at c (Fig. 85 (3)). The cells so formed, 
spermatids, are the young immature spermatozoa. They have a much reduced and denser 
nuclear mass, so forming a distinctive zone in the testis (Fig. 85 (3) d). They are shown by 
Lomen as commonly having a nucleus consisting of a U-shaped chromatin thread with a 
small detached nucleolus. As development advances the U becomes elongated to form a 
long stretched-out V. Forms such as those depicted in Fig. 85 (9) are common and charac- 
teristic of zone d. Cross-section of the mature forms are as seen at C, earlier forms appearing 
ring-like as at A. 
REFERENCES 
(h) THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
BUGAJEW, I. I. (1928). Zum Studium des Baues der malpighischen Gefasse bei den Insekten. 
ZooZ. Anz. 78, 24455. 
LECAILLON, A. (1899). Sur les prolongements ciliformes de certaines cellules du cousin adulte, 
Culexpipiens L. (Dipt.). Bull. Sot. Ent. Fr. 1899, 3534. 
MISSIROLI, A. (1925). I tubuli de1 Malpighi nell’ AnopheZes claviger. Annali d’lgiene, 35, 113-22. 
MISSIROLI, A. (1927). I tubuli de1 Malpighi nell’ Anopheles claviger. Riv. MaZarioZ. 6, l-7. 
NUTTALL, G. H. F. and SHIPLEY, A. E. (1903). Studies in relation to malaria. J. Hyg., Camb., 3, 
185-6. 
PANTEL, J. (19 14). Signification des ‘ glandes annexes ’ intestinales des larves des Ptychopteridae et 
observations sur les tubes de Malpighi de ces Nematoceres (larves et adultes). CeZZuZe, 29, 
393-429. 
PATTON, R. L. (1953). Excretion. In Roeder’s Insect physiology. John Wiley and Sons, New 
York; and Chapman and Hall, London. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (1953). Exchanges of sodium and potassium in mosquito larvae. J. Exp. BioZ. 30, 
79-89 (see also other papers listed under excretion in chapter XXXI, Physiology). 
ROUBAUD, E. (1923). Les d&harmonies de la fonction r&ale et leur consequences biologiques 
chez les moustiques. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 27, 627-79. 
SAINT-HILAIRE, K. (1927). Vergleichend-histologische Untersuchungen der malpighischen Gefasse 
bei Insekten. ZooZ. Anz. 73, 218-29. 
SCHINDLER, E. (1878). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der malpighi’schen Gefasse der Insekten. Z. wiss. 
ZooZ. 30, 587-660. 
VENEZIANI, A. (1904). Valore morphologico e fisiologico dei tubi malpighiani. Redia, 2, 177-230. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1931). The physiology of excretion in a blood-sucking insect Rhodnius 
prolixus (Hemiptera, Reduviidae). II. Anatomy and histology of the excretory system. 
J. Exp. BioZ. 8, 428-42. 
685 
EXCRETION AND REPRODUCTION 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933). The adaptation of mosquito larvae to salt water. J. Exp. Biol. 10, 
27-37. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The Principles of Insect Physiology. Ed. 2. (and subsequent 
editions). Methuen and Co., London. 
(i) THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
ABUL-NASR, S. E. (1950). Structure and development of the reproductive system of some species 
of Nematocera (order Diptera: suborder Nematocera). Phil. Trans. B, 234, 339-96. 
ALMAZOVA, V. V. (1935). Sur la determination de l’age d’AnopheZes d’apres le grandeur des ovi- 
ductes (in Russian). Med. Parasit., Moscow, 4, 345-54. (Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 24,95.) 
BODENHEIMER, F. (1923). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Kohlschnake Tipula ochracea. 2. wiss. 2001. 
121, 393-441. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1901). The anatomy and histology of the adult female mosquito. Rep. Malar. 
Comm. R. Sot. (4), l-20. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1911). Development of the egg follicle in Anophelines. Paludism, 2, 73-88. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1923). The structure and development of the female genital organs and 
hypopygium of the mosquito. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 698-71. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R., SINTON, J. A. and COVELL, G. (1939). How to do a malaria survey. Govt. 
India, HZth Bull. no. 14. Ed. 4. Delhi. 
DER BRELJE, R. VON (1924). Die Anhangsorgane des weiblichen Geschlechtsganges der Stech- 
mticken (Culicidae). ZooZ. Anz. 61, 73-80. 
EYSELL, A. (1924). Die Stechmticken. In Mense’s Handb. TropenKr. Ed. 3, 1, 176-87. 
GILLIES, M. T. (1954). The recognition of age groups within populations of Anopheles gambiae by 
the pre-gravid rate and the sporozoite rate. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 48, 58-74. 
GILLIES, M. T. (1955). The pre-gravid phase of ovarian development in Anopheles funestus. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 320-5. 
GILLIES, M. T. (1956). A new character for the recognition of nulliparous females of Anopheles 
gambiae. Bull. World Hlth Org. 15, 451-9. 
GRANDPRI?, A. D. DE and CHARMOY, D. D’E. DE (1900). Les moustiques. Anatomie et biologic. Port 
Louis, Mauritius. 
GROSS, J. (1903). Untersuchungen tiber die Histologie des Insekten-ovariums. Zool. Jb. 18, 
71-186. 
HAYES, R. V. (1953). Studies on the artificial insemination of the mosquito Agdes aegypti. 
Mosquito News, 13, 145-52. 
HECHT, 0. (1933). Die Blutnahrung, die Erzeugung der Eier und die Uberwinterung der Stech- 
mticken Weibchen. Arch. &hi&s. -u. Tropenhyg. 37, Beih. 3, l-87, 125-212. 
HERMS, W. B. and FREEBORN, S. B. (1921). The egg-laying habits of Californian Anophelines. 
J. Parasit. 7, 69-79. 
HOSOI, T. (1954). Egg production in CuZexpipienspaZZens Coquillett. III. Growth and degenera- 
tion of ovarian follicles. Jap. J. Med. Sci. Biol. 7, 11 l-27. 
IMMS, A. D. (1938). A General Text Book of Entomology. Methuen and Co., London. 
KULAGIN, N. (1901). Der Bau der weiblichen Geschlechtsorgane bei Culex. 2. wiss. 2001. 69, 
578-98. 
LECAILLON, A. (1900). Recherches sur la structure et le developpement post-embryonnaire de 
l’ovaire des insectes. I. Culex pipiens L. Bull. Sot. Ent. Fr. 1900, 96-100. 
MER, G. G. (1932). The determination of the age of Anopheles by differences in the size of the 
common oviduct. Bull. Ent. Res. 23, 563-6. 
MER, G. G. (1936). Experimental study on the development of the ovary in Anopheles elutus Edw. 
(Dipt. Culic.). Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 351-9. 
MIALL, L. C. and HAMMOND, A. P. (1900). The Structure and Life History of the Harlequin FZy 
(Chironomus). Clarendon Press, London. 
M~~LLRING, F. K. (1956). Autogene und anautogene Eibildung bei Culex L. zugleich ein Beitrag 
zur Frage der Unterscheidung autogener Weibchen an Hand von Eirijhrenzahl und Fltigel- 
hinge. 2. Tropenmed. u. Parasit. 7, 15-48. 
686 
REFERENCES 
NEVEU-LEMAIRE, M. (1902). Sur les receptacles seminaux de quelque Culicides. Bull. Sot. 2001. 
Fr. 27, 1’72-5. 
NICHOLSON, A. J. (1921). The development of the ovary and ovarian egg of a mosquito, Anopheles 
maculipennis Meigen. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 65, 395-448. 
PARKS, J. J. (1955). An anatomical and histological study of the female reproductive system and 
follicular development in Aedes aegypti (L.). Thesis. Univ. Minnesota. 
POLODOVA, Y. P. (1941). Changes in the oviducts of Anopheks with age and the determination of 
the physiological age of mosquitoes. Med. Parasit. 10,387. (Abstract in Rev. Appl. Ent. 31, 
187.) 
ROY, D. N. and MAJUNDAR, S. P. (1939). On mating and egg formation in Culex fatigans. J. 
Malar. Inst. India, 2, 243-51. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1933). Morphology of the insect abdomen. Part II. The genital ducts and the 
ovipositor. Smithson. Misc. COB. 89, no. 8, 148 pp. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). Principles of insect Morphology. New York and London. 
VISHNA NATH (1924). The egg follicle of Culex. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 69, 151-75. 
VISHNA NATH (1929). Studies on the shape of the Golgi apparatus. I. The egg follicle of Culex. 
2. Zellforsch. 8, 655-70. 
WEBER, H. (1933). Lehrbuch der Entomologie. Gustav Fischer, Jena. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). See under section (h). 
(j) THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS 
ABUL-NASR, S. E. (1950). See under section (i). 
ADIE, H. A. (1912). Note on the sex of mosquito larvae. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 6, 463-6. 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1922). The development and structure of the terminal abdominal segments 
and hypopygium of the mosquito with observations on the homologies of the terminal 
segments of the larva. Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 530-72. 
DUFOUR, L. (1851). Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques sur les Dip&es. M&n. Acad. 
Sci., Paris, 11, 171-360. 
HURST, C. H. (1890). The post-embryonic development of a gnat (Culex). Proc. and Trans. 
Lpool. Biol. Sot. 4. 
IMMS, A. D. (1908). On the larval and pupal stages of Anopheles maculipennis Meigen. Parasito- 
logy, 1, 103-32. 
KULAGIN, N. (1907). Zur Naturgesch. d. Mticken. 2002. Am. 31, 865-81. 
LOMEN, F. (1914). Der Hoden von Culex pipiens. Jena 2. Naturwiss. 52, 567-628. 
PRASHAD, B. (1916). Male generative organs of some Indian mosquitoes. Znd. J. Med. Res. 3, 
497-502. 
SNODGRASS, R. E. (1935). See under section (i). 
STEVENS, N. M. (1910). The chromosomes in the germ cells of Culex. J. Exp. Biol. 8, 207-17. 
STEVENS, N. M. (1911). Further studies in heterochromosomes in mosquitoes. Biol. Bull. 20, 
109-20. 
TAYLOR, M. (1914). The chromosome complex in Culex pipiens. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 60, 377-98. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). See under section (h). 
687 
xxx1 
THE IMAGO: PHYSIOLOGYb 
(a) GENETICS AND CHROMOSOMAL STRUCTURE 
In a paper entitled ‘ Mosquito genetics and cytogenetics’ with a bibliography of 216 
references, Kitzmiller (1953) has recently reviewed in detail what has been done in mosquito 
genetics and chromosomal structure. The author comments on the surprisingly large 
number of observations that have been made, but laments that these have so largely been 
merely incidental to other work or lacking in the precise information most desired by the 
geneticist. 
The subject of mosquito genetics is one that has been increasingly engaging attention and 
has become of considerable practical importance in connection with control measures, 
since the development of resistance to insecticides is now considered to be the result of the 
elimination of susceptible forms so that the species comes to be composed of a resistant 
strain or strains. (See ch. xxv, p. 558.) Another direction in which genetical studies have 
become of importance is in the systematics of certain groups, such as the Culex pz@iens 
complex, where it has been difficult to assign precise specific characterisation. Nor does the 
question rest here, for if, as may be the case, such groups represent the result of evolution in 
progress their study offers a wide field for investigation from many points of view, including 
that of the geneticist. A very helpful review of work in this field is given in the paper 
entitled ‘ Species hybrids in mosquitoes’ by Mattingly (1956). 
Recently Laven (1956) has described hereditarily transmitted changes in the wing 
venation and antenna1 characters in Culex molestus brought about through the action of 
X-rays (see ch. II (c), p. 33. By using such characters as marker genes a considerable 
field of investigation has been opened up. Another valuable aid in genetic studies in 
mosquitoes has been work on the pale-eyed mutant form of Culex molestus, the gene for 
which has been shown by Gilchrist and Haldane (1947) to be partially sex linked. 
On A@des aegypti are the studies by Gillett (1956) on genetic differences affecting egg- 
laying in two local forms of this species, the Lagos and Newala strains, showing that this 
character has a genetic basis. In this species too are the results of crossing of hybrid forms 
discussed in chapter II. In mosquitoes such transmission has certain peculiar characters, 
fertile offspring being limited to that transmitted by the female parent, at least in many 
cases, a result ascribed to cytoplasmic transmission and independent of genes, though not 
all authorities agree that this is proven. 
Genetical theory deals with the transmission of hereditary characters on the basis that 
these are (in most cases) dependent on genes. It is usual for genes to occur as couples, 
alleles, one of which is dominant, that is, if present gives rise to its own characteristic 
effects, and the other recessive, that is, it is only effective in the absence of the dominant 
gene. Offspring from pairing a ‘ strain ’ with the ‘ wild ’ form does not therefore usually show 
the recessive character in the first generation, that is generation F1, since all the offspring 
probably possess the dominant gene. But in the next sister-brother generation, F,, 
688 
GENETICS AND CHROMOSOMES 
a certain number will show the recessive character. In the case of a single recessive gene, 
unless there is some interfering effect, the proportion of offspring showing the recessive 
character in the F, generation will be theoretically, as the result of chance distribution of 
the genes, one to three, the progeny being BB Bb bB bb, where B is the dominant gene and 
b the recessive, the only individuals showing the recessive effect being bb. It is on such 
numerical results that the geneticist is largely able to form his conclusions. 
The simple case as given above is often modified in various ways, for example the 
recessive gene may be wholly or partly linked with sex, or genie crossing as described under 
chromosomal structure may modify the result. 
In practice, therefore, the original crossing should be followed up by brother-sister 
pairing at least to the F, generation and the numerical results carefully ascertained. Back 
crossing, that is pairing of selected members of Fz or later generations with the original, 
may also give valuable data. Obviously in such cases unless rearing and manipulation of 
the material is carefully carried out the results will be of little value since mortality or in- 
complete breeding-out of larvae, or even poor hatching of the original eggs, may give mis- 
leading results. 
The following are some works, other than those already mentioned, that may be helpful 
to anyone undertaking experimental work on mosquito genetics and unfamiliar with 
genetical theory: Goldschmidt (1938); Sinnott and Dunn (1939); Waddington (1939) ; 
Sturtevant and Beadle (1940) ; Snyder (1940); Haldane (1941). Also the account in the 
Pelican Books by Kalmus and Crump (1948). See also under the next section. 
CHROMOSOMAL STRUCTURE (Fig. 85) 
The most suitable stages for study of the chromosomes in mosquitoes are for most purposes 
the larva and pupa. In the imago the testes are too advanced to show division forms well. 
For the somatic tissues also material is best obtained from the larva or pupa. In Culex 
pipiens and Aedes aegypti Sutton (1942) found the best material to be the fourth instar larva, 
the pupa or newly emerged adults. For somatic division in different tissues Hance (19 17) 
uses the third instar larva. All authors emphasise the importance of good fixation and also 
the pre-treatment of material by rearing this under special optimal conditions. Such pre- 
treatment is especially important for the study of the giant salivary chromosomes. Mattingly 
(in lit.) especially stresses the difficulty of obtaining good preparations of chromosomes in 
A. aegypti and the necessity here of pre-treatment. Sutton found the best material was that 
kept at low temperatures (10-l 8” C.) for 2 or 3 days before killing. For the salivary 
chromosomes of Anoplzeles Frizzi (1947) adds yeast and vorticella to spring water used for 
culture and corrects for salinity and pH. Methods for dissecting the salivary glands in 
mosquito larvae and pupae are given by Jensen (1955). 
Material may be examined in sections, or more usually it is teased out in fixative and 
examined direct under a cover-glass as a ‘ squash ’ preparation or as a smear. Sections should 
be thick, 15,~. For teasing out tissues many authors use aceto-carmine;* or the tissues are 
dissected in Ringer’s solution and transferred to aceto-carmine, or aceto-carmine is run 
under the cover-glass (La Cour, 1931; Baker, 1945). Aceto-carmine swells the tissue and 
* For aceto-carmine Darlington and La Cour (1942) give the following: saturate boiling 45 per cent glacial 
acetic acid with excess of carmine, cool and filter. Dr Tate, however, informs me that special methods are required 
and that the process is difficult to apply. A liquid stain, carmine acetic, is listed by Gurr in his price list C, 
1954. 
44 689 CH 
PHYSIOLOGY 
shows the chromosomes larger than in sections (Stevens, 1911). Or tissues may be smeared 
and fixed (wet) in Flemming’s solution. Sutton notes that with the standard treatment 
(aceto-carmine or aceto-orcein) placing in a drop of stain and flattening by pressure on the 
cover-glass is ineffective with mosquito chromosomes as these are very soft and tend to be 
squashed rather than spread out. Tissues in this case are therefore best dissected out and 
fixed for one minute in ace.tic alcohol, then stained in acetic orcein (1 per cent orcein in 
45 per cent acetic) for about an hour. The tissue is then smeared in the usual way. For 
sections, fixation by some form of Flemming’s solution has usually been used (for 
formulae see Baker, 1945). For staining, good results are obtained with Heidenhain’s 
haematoxylin, thionin (Stevens, 1911) and safranin (Bolles Lee, 1950). 
The chromosomes are only seen as usually figured in cells undergoing division, or in 
nuclear changes preceding this when actual division of the cell is delayed. Otherwise the 
ordinary nuclear appearance only is apparent. For the various details in the process see 
Darlington (1937, who gives a good description) ; also for changes in the mosquito Whiting 
(1917, sperrnatogenesis and somatic division), also Hance (19 17, somatic division) and 
the very full studies in different forms in the earlier literature (Stevens, 1910, 1911; Taylor, 
1914, 1917; Carter, 1918 ; Holt, 1917, who first described multiple complexes during 
metamorphosis of the ileum as referred to later). 
Kitzmiller (1953) notes some thirty species of Culicidae for which the number of chromo- 
somes has been given (Corethra, spp. 2; Anopheles, spp. 6; Cttlex, spp. 10; Theobaldia 
(Culiseta), spp. 2; Agdes, spp. 8; Armigeres, sp. 1). Only a few observations relate to 
Atides aegypti (Carter, 1918 ; Sutton, 1942). With some doubtful exceptions the number of 
chromosomes in all cases has been a diploid number of six, that is three pairs each con- 
sisting of two closely approximated chromosomes (chromatids of some authors). This is 
the number in sexual or tissue cells where reduction (meiosis) has not taken place. For 
A. aegypti Carter (1918) gives the diploid number as four, but Sutton (1942) gives six which 
is the number now generally accepted. A haploid number (following reduction in meiosis) 
of three has been described in two species of Culex, in Theobaldia incidens and in Anopheles 
punctipennis. 
In Culex pipiens the chromosomes in late prophase appear as three pairs of bent 
(boomerang, U-, or V-shaped) rod-like structures. These are thicker towards their free ends 
and narrowest medianly (position of the centromere). Of the pairs, two are of approxi- 
mately equal length (autosomes), whilst the third pair is composed of shorter rods (Fig. 85 
(I), (2)). No indication in Culex is given of any separate sex chromosomes. In Anopheles, 
however, Stevens (19 11) describes the third shorter pair as consisting of two equal longer 
portions and two short portions. These short portions in the female are of equal length, but 
in the male one is longer than the other (hetero-chromosomes) (Fig. 85 (4), (5)). 
In mitosis the chromosomes in early prophase are seen as fine coiled contorted threads, 
as a rule evenly distributed throughout the nucleus with a plasmosome also present. The 
thin coils seen in optical section give the appearance at this stage of granules. The chromo- 
somes in later prophase appear as definite thread-like bodies which shorten and thicken. 
Later the pairs become arranged equatorially with the centromeres attached to the spindle 
fibres, which now appear, and with the ends still free (early metaphase). Division and 
drawing apart of the divided chromosomes to form two polar groups (late metaphase) and 
final formation of two groups of chromosomes (telophase) complete the process. During 
prophase the plasmosome, originally present, disappears and in metaphase the nuclear 
690 
GENETICS AND CHROMOSOMES 
membrane undergoes dissolution until in telophase it is reformed around the two separate 
chromosome clusters to complete eventually the nuclei of two new cells. 
Meiosis has been chiefly studied in spermatogenesis as seen in the testis. In the region of 
the spermatogonia division is by mitosis. Meiosis with reduction takes place by two succes- 
sive divisions, each division giving rise to characteristic layers of cells as described in the 
testis (ch. xxx (j)), the final result being the spermatids or developing spermatozoa. 
Nuclear reduction changes in the ovary, oogenesis, is stated by Kitzmiller to have been 
described only in very few observations. 
Figure 86. Chromosome structure. 
Chromosomes of female Culex pipiens. Metaphase from oogonia. After 
The magnification given is calculated on that given by the author as x 2000, 6 
Stevens (1911). 
The same of male Culex pipiens. Metaphase from spermatogonia. After Stevens (1911). 
The same for male Theobaldia. After Stevens (1911). 
The same for female Anopheles punctipennis. After Stevens (1911). a, equal pair of hetero- 
chromosomes. 
The same for male Anopheles punctipennis. After Stevens (1911). b, unequal pair of hetero- 
chromosomes. 
Salivary chromosomes of Anopheles aquasalis. After Frizzi (1953). Drawn from photograph. 
The striations are only drawn to give the general effect. Magnification is very approximately 
that of the other figures. 
During meiosis there may be ‘ crossing over ’ (chiasmata), the coiled dividing chromosomes 
becoming adherent at certain points with the formation of characteristic figures. The 
formation of chiasmata is described in Culex pipiens by Moffett (1936) and by Callan and 
Montalenti (1947). It was not found by the last-mentioned authors in Theobaldia 
longiareolata. 
The chromosomes as seen in the testes (spermatogenesis) show mitotic division in the 
spermatogonal region and meiosis in more distal portions of the organ. In cells of the body 
tissues division is by mitosis. In the larva and pupa division figures occur in the leg and 
691 44-2 
PHYSIOLOGY 
wing buds, in the hypodermal tissue, in nerve ganglia, in the large nuclei of the Malpi- 
ghian tubule cells, in the epithelium of the alimentary tract and as the large band forms, 
described below, in the salivary gland cells. 
A peculiar condition is that of the multiple complexes referred to above in the ileum 
during metamorphosis (Holt, 1917; Berger, 1936, 1938 a, b; Grell, 1946 a, b; Schuh, 1951). 
Berger describes multiple complexes of 96, 48, 24 and 12 chromosomes, as also the usual 
diploid number of 6, present in the epithelial cells of the pupal ileum during metamorphosis. 
Up to the eighth hour of pupal life the cells of the ileum increase only in size, not number. 
Multiplication as above then takes place. Schuh notes that in normal development of the 
larva the epithelium of the ileum becomes highly polyploid, while that of the colon remains 
diploid. At metamorphosis the colon epithelium degenerates and is replaced by cells from 
the ileum. These ileac cells divide rapidly to form small cells. Treatment of the larva 
with colchicine does not prevent degeneration of the colon cells, but does prevent their 
replacement. 
Of special interest are the large (giant) banded chromosomes in the salivary glands of 
the larva of some Diptera and first described in the larva of Anopheles maculipennis by 
Bogojawlensky (1934). They are described in Culex pipiens and AL;des aegypti by Sutton 
(1942) ; in Culex pipiens by Berger (1936) ; in different species of Anopheles by Frizzi (1947, 
1953). These remarkable structures appear as long coiled ribbon-like threads crossed by 
dark-stained bands and giving the appearance of spectra (Fig. 85 (6)). As noted by Kitz- 
miller these band-like forms may reach as much as 250~ in length as compared with up to 
some 6,~ of the usual form of chromosome. Maps of the banding in Culex pipiens and 
Culex jktigans have been given by Kitzmiller and Clarke (1952), and that in Anopheles 
atroparvus by Frizzi (reproduced in Kitzmiller, 1953). 
Sutton notes that large (giant) chromosomes resembling those of the salivary gland cells, 
but lacking the alternate bands and achromatic regions, are also to be found in the later 
stages of development in other tissues such as the Malpighian tubule cells and in the 
gastric caeca and mid-gut of the prepupal stage. 
(b) HORMONES 
Many processes in the development and life activities of insects are initiated or carried 
through by the action of hormones. These are chemical bodies secreted by special cells or 
organs which pass into the haemolymph and so reach the tissues on which they act. They 
are known to be concerned in growth and metamorphosis, in control of ovarian develop- 
ment and in many other vital processes. Research in this field involves delicate manipu- 
lations and dissections such as the implantation of insect parts and the linking up during 
life of parts of one insect with another (parabiosis). For obvious reasons most of the work 
has been carried out on relatively large insects. But though as yet little has been done in 
this connection directly upon the mosquito, hormones must here play an important part 
in the life processes and some brief reference to the results achieved would appear to be 
desirable. For a very interesting account of recent work in this direction see Wigglesworth 
(1951 a), also the recently published book by this author entitled The Physiology of Insect 
Metamorphosis (1954). A review of the subject is also given by Bodenstein (1953). 
692 
HORMONES 
GROWTH, MOULTING AND METAMORPHOSIS 
Working with the bug Rhodnius Wigglesworth (1934) demonstrated in a remarkable series 
of experiments that two hormones were concerned in moulting, one bringing about growth, 
moulting and imaginal differentiation, the growth hormone, and one that, acting with the 
growth hormone, maintained nymphal characters, the juvenile hormone. There was no 
hormone special to moulting other than the growth hormone which included moulting as 
a part of growth. Early experiments seemed to show that the growth hormone was secreted 
by the brain, since decapitation at a certain critical time following a blood meal in 
Rhodnius prevented moulting, whilst joining on the head of a last-stage nymph caused 
moulting to take place with imaginal characters. It had been found by Fukuda (1940), 
however, that in the silkworm pupal moulting was initiated from some source in the thorax 
which this author identified with the prothoracic gland. This was found also to be so in 
Rhodnius. For the prothoracic gland to act, however, it requires to be activated from the 
brain. Work on a large number of insects in different orders has amply confirmed the 
general existence of hormones acting much as in Rhodnius and has brought forward a 
wealth of information regarding the nature and mechanism of growth and metamor- 
phosis which cannot here be dealt with, but which will be found graphically and clearly 
described in the paper and book by Wigglesworth previously referred to. By implantation 
and parabiosis giant and minute forms of a number of insect species have been produced 
through causing extra instar moults or precociously developed imaginal characters. Very 
briefly it would appear that the body cells, especially those of the cuticle, have latent possi- 
bilities of expressing both nymphal and imaginal characters, depending upon the hormones 
acting upon them. So long as the growth hormone is controlled by the juvenile hormone 
nymphal or larval characters are maintained by the latter. The growth hormone acting 
alone causes the latent imaginal characters to appear, even precociously under experi- 
mental conditions. 
Three sources of hormones are concerned with growth, moulting and metamorphosis, 
namely (1) the neurosecretory cells of the brain secreting a hormone that activates the pro- 
thoracic gland; (2) the prothoracic gland or structures homologous with or representing 
this which secrete the growth hormone; (3) the corpora allata which secrete the juvenile 
hormone. There is a further structure that should receive mention, namely (4) the corpus 
cardiacum the precise function of which is uncertain (Wigglesworth, 1954). 
The neurosecretory cells are large conspicuous cells situated in the pars cerebralis 
bordering upon the median fissure. They were first described in the brain of the honey-bee 
by Weyer (1928) and later in a similar situation in many insect orders (Hanstrom, 1938; 
Day, 1940; Thomsen, 1952, and others). The presence of granules gives these cells a charac- 
teristic appearance under dark-ground illumination. The‘granules are fuchsinophilous and 
stain deep blue with Gomori’s stain (chrome-haematoxylin following oxidation with 
permanganate, Gomori, 194 1). Neurosecretory cells giving this characteristic staining with 
Gomori’s stain have recently been described by Clements (1956) in Culex pipiens. About 
ten are present in the pars cerebralis and others are present in different parts of the supra- 
oesophageal and sub-oesophageal ganglia and in the abdominal ganglia of the pupa and 
adult. Large cells that may be of this character have been figured in the brain of &des 
aegypti in the chapter dealing with this organ. 
The prothoracic glands (see review by Williams, 1949) were described by Lyonet in the 
693 
PHYSIOLOGY 
caterpillar of the goat moth as early as 1762, being termed by him ‘ granulated vessels ‘. 
They were later described in the silkworm by Verson and Bisson (1891) as the hypo- 
stigmatic gland and since by other authors in a number of species of Lepidoptera. What 
appear to be homologous organs have also been recorded in hemimetabolous insects in 
a number of other orders. In their typical form the glands are situated one on each side 
in close connection with the tracheae posterior to the prothoracic spiracle and extending 
along the tracheal trunks as diffuse bead-like strings of large cells. In Rhodnius the pro- 
thoracic glands are described by Wigglesworth (195 1 b) as two strands of large cells with 
enormous lobulated nuclei deeply embedded in the fat-body and extending through the 
prothorax and mesothorax. They break down and disappear in the adult within 48 hours 
of moulting. In the higher Diptera what appear to be homologous with the prothoracic 
glands are the large cells forming the lateral portions of the ring glands of Weismann 
(peritracheal glands of Possompes, 1953) which secrete the hormone leading to the forma- 
tion of the puparium. 
In the mosquito the large cells surrounding the corpora allata have been considered as 
homologous with the peritracheal cells of Possompes and so probably the source of the 
growth hormone. As noted by Bodenstein (1945) they undergo dissolution and are not 
present in the imago. 
The corpora allata were first recognised as ductless glands by Nabert (19 13) who recorded 
them in a number of insect orders. They usually occur as ganglion-like bodies one on each 
side in the retrocerebral complex. In the higher Diptera they are present as a single median 
structure in the dorsal part of the ring gland of Weismann. Their appearance in the mosquito 
has been described in a previous chapter. They continue to be present with much the same 
characters as before in the adult when the larger cells forming the peritracheal gland sur- 
rounding them have undergone change or dissolution. 
The corpora cardiaca, also known as the oesophageal or pharyngeal ganglia, are 
normally small ganglion-like bodies on each side of the hypocerebral ganglion. They 
receive on each side two nerves from the neurosecretory cells in the brain, and a nerve is 
continued from them to the corpus allaturn of their side. They appear to be of mixed 
nervous and glandular nature and contain cells showing granules that stain selectively with 
Gomori’s stain. In the higher Diptera they appear as a median group of cells in the ventral 
portion of the ring gland. There has been much controversy as to their presence in the 
mosquito, and in Culex Cazal (1948) considered them to be fused with the hypocerebral 
ganglion and present as a median group of cells embedded in this ganglion. Recently 
Clements (1956) has recorded the presence of two groups of previously undescribed cells 
situated between the corpora allata and the tracheal commissure. Each group consists of 
three or four large cells with large nuclei and extensive cytoplasm containing granular 
material that stains with Gomori’s chrome-haematoxylin. From these cells axons run 
forward in the cardiacal nerve under the tracheal commissure. The cells are present in the 
pupa and imago and in less developed form can be detected in the fourth instar larva. The 
author suggests that the cell groups are the corpora cardiaca. 
694 
HORMONES 
OVARIAN DEVELOPMENT 
The corpora allata, in addition to their action in metamorphosis, have been shown to be 
concerned in the control of ovarian development. If the ovaries of the adult female 
Rhodnius are removed, the corpora allata undergo hypertrophy as shown also by Thomsen 
(1952) in Calliphora and by Day (1943) in Lucilia. Detinova (1945) found that ligation of 
Anopheles macuZ@ennis between the head and the thorax did not prevent development of 
the ovaries after a blood meal, but if done between the prothorax and mesothorax within 
6 hours of a blood meal it did so, and he concluded that the corpora allata stimulated 
ovarian growth by secreting a gonadotrophic hormone after blood feeding. Wigglesworth 
(1948) in a footnote notes that it is probable that the yolk-forming hormone and the 
juvenile hormone are identical. Clements, working with the autogenous form of CuZex 
pipiens (C. molestus), found that no specimens decapitated earlier than 7 hours after 
emergence developed their ovaries beyond the resting stage and that none ligated at the 
base of the abdomen earlier than 5 hours did so. But many decapitated and ligated after 
7 and 5 hours respectively developed their follicles to maturity or to a lesser degree. In 
these experiments decapitation removed the neurosecretory cells and cut the cardiacal 
nerves and the recurrent nerve, whilst ligation isolated the ovaries from all endocrine 
organs outside the abdomen. There is thus evidence that the development of the ovaries in 
autogenous mosquitoes is stimulated by a gonadotrophic hormone secreted within a few 
hours of emergence presumably by the corpora allata. On decapitation of anautogenous 
females (C. pipiens form herbericus) following a blood meal, a proportion developed their 
ovaries, as was also found by Detinova in experiments with Anopheles maculipennis. 
A similar result was obtained with Ai;des aegypti, as also with Anopheles Zabranchiae 
atroparvus. Anopheles stephensi, however, ligated up to an hour or more following a blood 
meal did not develop the ovaries. It seemed possible therefore that in the ordinary anauto- 
genous mosquito hormone is secreted before feeding takes place or that some other 
mechanism is involved. 
Gillett (1956), studying development of the follicle in Ak;des aegypti, found that develop- 
ment beyond the resting stage (stage 2) depends on the taking of a blood meal. In 
mosquitoes decapitated before the critical period following this, development of the oocyte 
begins, but it stops short at or before stage 3, whereas in those decapitated after the 
critical period development goes on to maturity (stage 5). The critical period in two African 
strains was at 8-14 hours and in a Malayan strain possibly a little earlier. The author 
concludes that it is possible that initiation of ovarian development beyond stage 2 is under 
direct nervous control as a result of a stimulus provided by entry of blood into the stomach 
(or stretching of the stomach wall), though there was evidence that development in 
mosquitoes decapitated late in the precritical period goes a little further than in those 
decapitated early. 
(c) RESERVES 
FORMATION AND PURPOSE OF RESERVES 
Except the yolk initially passed from the female in the egg, reserves in mosquitoes are 
derived from (a) food taken in during the larval stage; (b) such food as may be taken in by 
the imago; and (c) tissues or organs which in the course of metamorphosis are no longer 
695 
. 
PHYSIOLOGY 
required and undergo histolysis. In some mosquitoes nectar forms an important source of 
food of the imago and is capable of allowing for the normal activities of the species 
without a blood meal (Hocking, 1953). It is improbable that Ai;des aegypti females under 
natural conditions normally take any food other than blood, and in capitivity, if given 
water, females readily survive for seven days or more without food. 
Reserves are used for the purpose of (a) maintaining life during periods in the life 
history when no food is taken; (b) providing material for the formation of new tissues and 
organs ; and (c) providing energy for such activities as flight. 
RESERVES IN METAMORPHOSIS 
From the start the egg provides in the form of yolk a mass of reserve substances utilised in 
the building up of the pre-instar larva. This stage is completed in the first few days from 
oviposition. But the pre-instar larva may remain viable in the egg for periods which in some 
circumstances may extend to months. Furthermore at hatching the young larva has to 
undertake muscular movements and other activities for some hours before it is capable of 
taking food. As at hatching little or no yolk remains as such, life must be maintained 
during this period by reserves of some other kind, and, as already noted, the young first- 
stage larva already has in the fat-body fine granules of an albuminoid nature and some fat 
globules. 
During the larval period when food is taken there is not only growth, but a steady 
storing up of reserves which reaches a maximum in the fourth instar larval stage and 
especially is very noticeable just before pupation when the larvae are notably plump and 
fat. During the pupal stage it is largely on this store of reserves, together with the products 
of histolysis of no longer required larval structures, that the body of the imago is built up. 
The large abdominal muscles of the larva are, however, largely retained by the pupa. At 
emergence of the imago there is still an important period to be passed through before the 
insect obtains its first blood meal and during which for up to some 2 days it does not feed. 
During this time important changes are going on. The abdominal muscles are now broken 
down and absorbed, the salivary glands develop secretion and the ovary and testes undergo 
changes. Eventually the female takes a blood meal, if available, usually on the third day. 
If such food is not available, the female imago can still live for a considerable period even 
actively using its wing muscles and making other expenditure of energy. The male with its 
more slender resources does not usually live so long. Both sexes, however, at this time have 
important functions to perform for continuation of the species, the female to develop its 
ovarian follicles to a suitable stage, the male to provide spermatozoa. It will be con- 
venient to follow these later activities in some detail. 
RESERVES AND OVARIAN DEVELOPMENT 
Normally in most mosquitoes the ovaries in the absence of a blood meal develop only to a 
more or less fixed stage, namely with the follicles at stage 2 (Christophers, 1911). In 
A. aegypti a single blood meal is then sufficient to complete ovarian development and allow 
of oviposition. In certain cases, however, the female mosquito may require more than one 
blood meal to bring about this result. 
Gillies (1955), dealing with the gonotrophic cycle in Anopheles gambiae and A. fimestus 
as seen in specimens caught in nature, found a proportion of females in which multiple 
696 
RESERVES 
blood meals were required for completion of the first gonotrophic cycle. This proportion 
he termed the pre-gravid rate. Observation showed that this rate was considerable only 
when the population density of the species was very large or very small. The females 
showing the condition were found to be mainly newly emerged, the author concluding that 
a pre-gravid phase of development in which more than one blood meal was required 
occurred when the ovaries at the time of the first feed had not reached stage 2. In this 
connection one may recall the observations by Mer (1936) on Anopheles elutus, referred to 
in a previous chapter, in which the author found that development up to stage 2 can be 
achieved either at the expense of reserves carried over from the larval stage or by feeding 
on raisins. One blood meal then sufficed for oviposition. With poor larval food, however, 
development to stage 2 was impaired and a single blood meal did not then suffice. That the 
pre-gravid rate was high only when the anopheline population density was either very 
large or very small would seem to support the view that in the first case it was due to over- 
crowding and in the second to deterioration in the breeding conditions of the species. 
A striking instance of the use of material obtained from histolysis of organs to ensure 
ovarian development and oviposition has been given by Hocking (1952). A species of 
AFdes in Manitoba normally does not take a blood meal, but utilises the imaginal flight 
muscles to develop the eggs. The females are found in a flightless condition and the degree 
of breakdown of the indirect wing muscles is related to that of egg development. The author 
notes that the nitrogen content of the flight muscles in this case is roughly equivalent to 
that of about sixty eggs. 
RESERVES AND MALE ACTIVITY 
The life of the male is usually short, at most 3 or 4 days. But during that time it is not only 
extremely active in frequent flight, but copulates many times. In an interesting communica- 
tion Gillett (1955) notes that males of a certain African strain of A. aegypti were able to 
copulate in quick succession with eight females, though only the first three or four were 
successfully fertilised. Males, however, apparently exhausted of sperms by three or four 
consecutive matings were again able to fertilise females after a rest of 36 hours. In copu- 
lations at lesser periods they failed to fertilise. The formation of new sperms would there- 
fore appear to have been dependent either on reserves or on food taken, should raisins or 
sugar have been available. 
RESERVES AND ENERGY 
The relation of reserves to work, fuel consumption and thoracic temperature in flight has 
been intensively studied in insects by a number of observers (see Wigglesworth, 1942 ; 
Hocking, 1953; Sotavalta, 1952, 1954a, b; Clements, 1955; for other authors see list of 
references given by Hocking). 
The methods of investigation include the use of some form of roundabout, which allows 
the insect to fly with minimum friction (see description and figure given by Hocking, 1953, 
p. 276; also Sotavalta, 1954a, p. 3; Clements, 1955, p. 547). Flying in the case of 
mosquitoes is continuous so long as the tarsi are not in contact with any surface. 
Reserves in the fat-body consist chiefly of fat, glycogen and protein (Wigglesworth, 
1942). In Diptera, however, authors are in agreement that the material used as a source of 
energy is chiefly, if not entirely, carbohydrates (glycogen and sugar). Thus Clements found 
no difference in the fat-body fat in flight-exhausted mosquitoes, though glycogen had 
disappeared. According to Hocking (1953) the exact chemical nature of energy reserves is 
697 
PHYSIOLOGY 
not required in estimating energy equivalents, as the energy 
materials are essentially similar. The following data are given 
exhausted by flying. 
Original Exhausted Weight Equivalent 
weight weight lost glycogen 
Species (mg.) (mg.) (mg.) (mg.) 
AEdes campestris 6.72 5.22 l-50 O-24 
A. communis 3.11 242 O-69 0.11 
A. nearcticus 3.15 2.45 0.70 0.11 
A. punctor 5.77 4.49 l-28 o-20 values of the main food 
for four species of Ad;des 
Equivalent Water 
glucose loss 
(mg.) (mg.) 
0.269 1.27 
O-124 0.57 
0.124 0.57 
0.225 1.06 
The columns given as equivalents of glycogen and of glucose are the weight of tissue 
reserves expressed as these substances calculated from the duration of flight. The water loss 
is calculated from the author’s figures for water loss per mg. of glycogen, taking the given 
figure of 5.25 mg. per mg. of glycogen. 
Clements, using the flight-mill arm figured by Hocking, gives the following data regarding 
flight and energy requirements in Culexpipiens form berbericus. The figures give the mean 
number of metres flown when flown to exhaustion on successive days. 
Distance flown (in metres) 
f- * \ 
Condition in which flown Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Total 
Unfed 72-96 hours old, first flight 1292 455 314 242 129 2422 
Fed on blood, as above 1564 1809 1055 410 225 5063 
The estimated reserves of an unfed female aged 48-72 hours were approximately 00 12 mg. 
glucose. The excess distance of flight following a blood meal was 2641 metres equivalent to 
O-061 mg. glucose as used by an exhausted mosquito fed on glucose. A meal of blood 
contained only 0.003 mg. glucose so that the mosquitoes were able to utilise products of 
blood digestion to produce energy reserves for flight. 
Hibernating specimens of Culex pipiens form pipiens taken from a cellar in December 
and raised to room temperature when flown to exhaustion gave a mean distance flown of 
4300 metres (max. 8674; rnin. 2239) with speeds up to about 1-O metres per second, equiva- 
lent to 0*099 mg. glucose as used by Culex pipiens form berbericus. 
Heat production in insects during flight has been studied by Sotavalta (1954 b). This 
author, using a delicate form of thermostat placed in the thorax of certain insects flown on 
a roundabout, found rises of temperature varying between 3” and 16” C. above that of the 
outside temperature (in large Diptera 2.5” to 8” C.). It was not found possible to make 
determinations in small insects such as mosquitoes. 
(d> THE INTEGUMENT 
Physiologically the integument plays a very important and varied role in the life of an 
insect. Besides being a covering and a skeleton affording attachments for muscles and 
other structures, it is from the integument that are mainly derived structures controlling 
respiration, that the organs of tactile and other sensory impressions are largely formed, and 
it is the integument that mostly determines the very nature of the insect in its different 
stages of metamorphosis. It is here, however, being considered in the limited sense of a 
cutaneous covering and from a general point of view. For a description of the insect 
integument see Wigglesworth (1933, 1947, 1948, 1957) and Richards (1951, 1953). Only 
698 
THE INTEGUMENT 
such brief account can here be given as will serve to be explanatory of such references as 
are made to Aedes aegypti. 
The insect integument consists of a layer of epithelial cells with basement membrane, the 
epidermis (hypodermis of many authors), and external to this a non-cellular secreted layer, 
the cuticle. The cuticle when normally developed further consists of three layers: (1) the 
endocuticle; (2) the exocuticle; and (3) the epicuticle. The endocuticle and exocuticle are 
both chitinous, consisting of a chitin-protein complex, and together constitute the pro- 
cuticle. The epicuticle is non-chitinous. 
The endocuticle forms the inner and main thickness of the cuticle. It is usually, as seen in 
sections, light-coloured and somewhat translucent. It is tough and more or less elastic. It 
is penetrated by excessively fine canals, pore canals, that are shown up by allowing frozen 
sections to become dry, so that the canals become filled with air, and then mounted. The 
pore canals pass vertically through its substance and contain fine cytoplasmic extensions 
from the epidermal cells. The exocuticle is that portion of the procuticle which becomes 
impregnated with hardening material, ‘ sclerotin ‘, and forms the sclerites and other hard 
parts of the integument. The epicuticle is a very thin surface layer. In those insects where 
it has been studied it consists of a number of layers. These consist of: a thin ‘cuticulin’ 
layer, the first to be secreted by the epidermal cells ; a ‘lipid ’ or ‘wax’ layer, also secreted 
by the cells, which gives water-proofing to the cuticle; and an external ‘cement’ layer 
poured out subsequent to moulting as a fluid secretion by the dermal glands and which later 
hardens (Wigglesworth, 1947). 
At ecdysis when the new cuticle is beginning to be formed by the laying down of a 
sclerotin layer a break occurs between this and the endocuticle of the old cuticle. This break 
is tiled with fluid, ecdysiaZj?uid, at first thought to be secreted by the dermal glands, but 
now known to be secreted by the epidermal cells by way of the pore canals. This fluid 
contains enzymes which gradually dissolve the old endocuticle, so that ultimately little is 
left of the old cuticle except the thin epicuticle. It follows that the cast skin, for example 
at pupation, neither in thickness nor in weight represents that of the whole larval cuticle. 
Meanwhile the new cuticle is being built up within, but separated from, the old. These 
changes are more or less common to all insects and apply in general to A. aegypti. 
Something too should be said regarding hardening of the cuticle following upon moulting. 
Very commonly the new cuticle when first exposed is pale or white or even transparent as 
contrasted with the cast old cuticle. Thus in the larva at ecdysis the head of the newly emerged 
stage is almost transparent, but later becomes dark or almost black. As well as darkening 
in colour the new cuticle also hardens. This hardening, as first pointed out by Pryor (1940), 
is now recognised to be a form of tanning. The process as seen in the puparium of Sarco- 
phaga is summarised as follows by Richards (1953). Sclerotisation begins at the epi- 
cuticle-procuticle interface and spreads inwards giving rise to a mature cuticle composed 
of exocuticle and endocuticle. The substrate for the tanning reaction, that is tyrosine or 
products of this substance, diffuses from the blood and becomes oxidised by oxidase 
located in the epicuticle to form 0-quinone, which diffuses inwards transforming the 
chitin-protein of the outer part of the procuticle into sclerotin and so forming an exocuticle. 
Something also should be said about the surface structures borne by the cuticle. The 
cuticle itself may bear markings, such as polygonal markings, indicating the cell outlines 
or corrugations. It usually also carries processes in the form of microtrichae, hairs or setae, 
spines and scales. Microtrichae are simple small spine-like elevations of the epicuticle. 
699 
PHYSIOLOGY 
Hairs and cuticular spines are secreted around cytoplasmic extensions from special cells 
in the epithelial layer, trichogen cells, which thrust themselves through a tormogen cell 
from which a socket for the hair is formed. Scales are derived from much enlarged epi- 
thelial cells which form club-shaped projections that later flatten. Situated in the epithelial 
layer are the dermal glands. These consist of large cells and have ducts passing through the 
cuticle to the surface. Also associated with the integument are the oenocytes (see ch. XIV 
(f), p. 337). Dermal glands are said not to be present in some insects including Diptera and 
they do not seem to have been described in the mosquito. I have not succeeded in detecting 
them in the newly formed cuticle of the prepupa or of the imago prior to ecdysis from the 
pupa, but they may be difficult to detect and the above requires confirmation. Oenocytes, 
too, in A. aegypti, though they may be concerned in formation of the cuticle by providing 
material for this, are well separated from the integument and are more suitably considered 
independently. 
In A. aegypti the cuticle presents different characters in the larva, pupa and imago. It is 
best studied as developed in the imago, or as being formed prior to ecdysis, especially in 
the fourth instar pre-ecdysis larva or in the forming imaginal cuticle in the pupa. 
In the larva of A. aegypti the cuticle is peculiar, even among mosquitoes, in being almost 
entirely free from sclerotised areas, other than the head capsule, respiratory siphon, anal 
plate and some areas about, and at the base of, some hairs and spines, notably the pleural 
hairs. Even the small oval tergites seen in the larvae of Anopheles and other mosquitoes 
are completely absent. Also the cuticle is very thin and the cast skins, even of the fourth 
instar, are, apart from hairs and the parts mentioned above, almost transparent when 
mounted. Its thickness is given by Richards and Anderson (1942) as between 0.75,~ and 
2.0,~. Though very thin, the larval cuticle is nevertheless extremely impermeable to watery 
fluids as is clearly shown in attempting to mount larvae in say, glycerine, without making 
some small opening. As shown by Wigglesworth (1933), however, the cuticle of the anal 
papillae is readily permeable and plays an important part in the osmotic processes con- 
nected with the haemolymph. 
Though the larval cuticle is so thin and free from marked thickening it still shows areas of 
cuticle covering the segments as distinct from the thinner and more folded intersegmental 
areas. 
Very different is the cuticle of the pupa where the whole body is encased in hard sclero- 
tised and dark-coloured armour-like cuticle. In this case, namely that of an active obtec- 
tate pupa, it is, however, only the exposed portions of the cuticle that are so hardened. Much 
unexposed cuticle covering the cemented limbs and other parts of the pre-imago are soft and 
inconspicuous. As described in an earlier chapter such parts of the cuticle are freely 
exposed at pupal ecdysis through removal of cementing fluid by fixatives, so that the early 
pupa when fixed no longer retains its shape but shows the wings and other parts much as 
in the resulting imago. A further point also previously mentioned is the peculiar outer coat- 
ing of some substance soluble in chloroform which, left intact, gives to the pupal cuticle 
very resistant properties. Certain colour changes too that occur in the cuticle of the pupa 
have also been described. 
The cuticle of the imago is fully sclerotised, forming the usual exoskeleton of articulated 
plates and intersegmental membranes. It is formed very early within the pupal skin so that 
some time before emergence the dark scaling of the imago is already very apparent. Hence 
on emergence the imago unlike the pupa is already dark-coloured and changes but little 
7oo 
THE INTEGUMENT 
in this respect later. The sclerotised areas bear microtrichae, socketed hairs and scales. The 
microtrichae are small, thin and hair-like, measuring only some 5-10,~ in length. Both hairs 
and scales have basal sockets (Fig. 50 (7)). The membranous areas carry only microtrichae. 
These are, however, stouter and larger than are present on the smooth sclerite areas. 
A very curious feature of the imago is the character of the pleural membrane. As already 
noted this does not apparently stretch following the great expansion of the abdomen from 
a blood meal, but is very voluminous and in the unexpanded abdomen is tucked in folds 
under the edge of the tergites. It is not a simple membrane, but consists of a thin basal 
membrane on which are closely and regularly arranged small oval or circular plaques each 
carrying up to five or six long curved thorn-like microtrichae (Fig. 50 (6), A, B, c). The 
condition does not extend to the intersegmental membrane and is confined to the pleura. 
The neck membrane is also closely covered with microtrichae which in this case are rather 
thick and peg-like, but single and arising directly from the membrane (Fig. 50 (6), D). 
Other membranes carry somewhat similar microtrichae though usually thinner and more 
sparsely distributed. 
(e) RESPIRATION 
Provision for respiration in the egg of insects is often quite complex with an elaborate 
arrangement of air channels or spaces. It is possible that the silvery network so con- 
spicuous on the eggs of some anophelines and which have been here described in A. aegypti 
may have such a function. These air spaces are, however, external to the thick endochorion 
and whether they are concerned with respiration of the egg or not is as yet unknown. 
In all other stages arrangements for respiration are through the tracheal system. 
Respiration is, however, not the only function in which the tracheal system plays a part. 
In the larva it is largely responsible for maintaining the specific gravity and necessary 
attitude to enable the larva to attach its siphon to the surface. In the imago it almost 
certainly helps flight by increasing buoyancy. In the mosquito, however, there is no 
development of the large air sacs so conspicuous in many insects. 
The required oxygen is obtained almost entirely through this system.* Though the larva 
leads an aquatic life it does not, like some aquatic larvae, possess gills, the anal papillae 
as shown by Wigglesworth (1938) being concerned almost entirely with osmotic regulation 
of the haemolymph. It would seem too that, except in the first instar, very little respiration 
through the integument takes place. With a view to ascertaining to what extent larvae can 
exist on cutaneous respiration a number of authors have attempted to ascertain the time 
that larvae can remain alive when submerged, but without very clear results (Da Costa 
Lima, 1914; Sen, 1915; Macfie, 1917; Koch, 1920). Macfie calculated that a full-grown 
larva of A. aegypti in 8 C.C. of water shaken with air should, if it could utilise the dis- 
solved gas, live for 42 hours, whereas it lived only 12 hours in such water and in boiled 
water only 4 hours. In the first instar, however, the larva can remain alive for several days 
without air ever entering its tracheae. 
The oxygen required is obtained in the main through the spiracles. Control of air 
entering the spiracles in the larva is restricted to closure when submerging and establishing 
air contact when at the surface. Such air contact takes place automatically through the 
* For the growth and regeneration of the tracheal system and the method by which tissues receive their tracheal 
supply see Wigglesworth (1954). 
701 
PHYSIOLOGY 
anatomical characters of the spiracular parts and the physical properties of the surface 
film of water. When these properties are altered, for example in oil, oil enters the tracheae. 
Much the same occurs with the respiratory trumpets of the pupa, these being fully opened 
on contact with the surface by surface tension. In the imago there are two large thoracic 
spiracles and a number of smaller abdominal spiracles in connection with all of which 
there are muscles capable of controlling the opening. Why this should be necessary is 
probably more to conserve water than to regulate the supply of oxygen. 
In order to reach the tissues it is necessary that oxygen should reach the tracheoles. This 
it can do only by diffusion. The rate of diffusion is more rapid and effective than might at 
first be thought. Krogh (1941) estimated the tracheal volume of the Culex larva to be 
13 mm.3 and that enough O2 diffused through the spiracles to supply the requirements 
of the insect’s tissues. In some insects mechanical ventilation may facilitate diffusion. 
There may be respiratory movements of the abdomen or rhythmical closing and opening of 
the spiracles. No such movements appear to take place in either the larva or imago of the 
mosquito. Babak (1912), however, has described rhythmical pulsations of the tracheal 
trunks in the larva. 
That the necessary amount of oxygen should diffuse to the tracheoles is essential since 
it is only by this channel that it can be conveyed. The haemolymph contains no haemo- 
globin or other effective means of doing so. There is, however, in the larva the curious 
‘ tracheal lung’ as noted by Imms (1907) and here described, where there would appear to 
be definite association of a mass of tracheoles with the haemolymph the exact function of 
which is not very clear. Further, the supply must be adequate to the requirements of the 
tissues. A very noticeable fact is the much greater volume of the tracheae in the imago, 
other than the large abdominal trunks, than in the larva, where the muscular system is 
relatively small in volume and less highly developed than in the imago with its massive 
wing muscles. 
A special study of the physiology of the changes in the tracheoles largely dealing with the 
mechanism of respiration in the larva of A. aegypti has been made by Wigglesworth in a 
number of papers. Only very brief reference can here be made. Especially important is the 
permeability of the tracheole wall allowing absorption of fluid to take place. When first 
hatched the tracheal system of the first instar larva is filled with fluid and remains so until 
contact is made with air at the surface. When such contact is made, air quickly enters as a 
result of the fluid being absorbed. The same occurs at ecdysis, the new larger tracheae, 
which form around the old air-filled tracheae just before ecdysis, being filled with liquid 
(moulting fluid). In the first instar larva which has been kept from contacting the surface 
the absorption becomes less and less rapid until by the fourth day the tracheae fail to fill 
with air. A similar decrease in the absorption of fluid and entry of air replacing this takes 
place at each ecdysis if larvae are kept from contacting air. 
Exchange of O2 and CO2 takes place in the tracheoles where these terminate in close 
connection with the tissue cells. Though the walls of the tracheae are impermeable to fluid, 
those of the tracheoles are permeable and towards their termination contain fluid perme- 
ated from the tissues. The extent to which fluid is present is dependent upon osmotic 
conditions in the tissues. Muscular activity increases the osmotic power of the tissues and 
fluid is withdrawn from the tracheoles and air extends further towards their terminations. 
By observing the extent of fluid in the tracheoles under various conditions, especially in 
the starved larva, much connected with respiration can be studied. Thus with the aid of an 
702 
RESPIRATION 
appropriate apparatus Wigglesworth (1930) studied the effect on the larva of various gases 
and of oil. 
An important aspect of respiration is the nature of the respiratory exchange, that is the 
extent to which oxygen is taken up, oxygen uptake, as also the relation of this to CO3 
passed out, respiratory quotient, and other features. Determinations of oxygen uptake in 
the mosquito have been made by Sen. This author found 0, uptake for the full-grown larva 
of Culex microannulatus (a rather small mosquito) to be 1.1 mm? per larva per hour, or, 
taking the weight of such a larva to be about 3 mg., an uptake of 370 mm.3 per gram per 
hour. For the pupa the uptake was 536 mm.3 per gram per hour for C. microannulatus 
and 488 for AZdes scutellaris. For the imago of Culex microannulatus the rate was 26 mm.3 
per mosquito per hour, or about 8000 mm.3 per gram per hour. The amount of CO, given 
off was about 25 nnn3 per mosquito, making the respiratory quotient about 1.0. Judging 
from the author’s description the mosquitoes were able to move about freely. 
Table 50. Oxygen uptake for the larva, pupa and imago of Aedes aegypti 
Date 
25. vii. 47 25. vii. 47 
25. vii. 47 
11. viii. 47 
12. viii. 47 
12. viii. 47 
2. ix. 47 
2. ix. 47 
3. ix. 47* 
3. ix. 47t Temperature No. 
(” C.) used 
25.5 2 25.5 2 
26.2 4 
27.9 10 
27.6 10 
28.0 8 
27.5 3 
27.4 4 
27.6 2 
27.6 1 Weight 
(mg.) 
Larva 
10.1 - 
- 
40.0 
45.8 
Pupa 
31.7 
14.8 
- 
- 
- Mean 
02 uptake 
Time (mm.*) (mm.“) 
in 02 per gram per gram 
minutes (mm.9) per hour per hour 
18 3 990 24 4 - 
26 8 - 1079 
15 12 1200 
20 16 1048 I 
50 24 
94 17 
60 16 819 
35 4 
45 10 
Imago (female) 
5. ix. 47 28.0 2 4.86 105 40 4713 5. ix. 47 28.0 2 6.38 70 26 3495 4104 
* Dark pupa approaching emergence. t Pupa during emergence. 
Some observations by the present author for 0, uptake by AL;des aegypti gave mean 
values for the full-grown female larva of 1079 mm.3 per gram per hour; for the pupa 
819 nrn~.~ per gram per hour; and for the female imago 4104 mm.3 per gram per hour 
(Table 50). A pupa in the act of emergence gave an uptake of approximately 3000 mm.3 
or about the same as for the adult. The adult mosquitoes were confined in a small space 
and though able to fly rarely did so and on being liberated were more or less feeble. 
Recently Hocking (1953) has given data based on the utilisation of glucose and glycogen. 
On pp. 287-8 this author gives, along with data for a number of other insects, the metabolic 
rate at rest and when flying for three species of Agdes, including A. nearcticus which was 
found the most suitable for experiment. The O2 uptake for resting metabolism in this species 
was 5.57 cc. per gram per hour, or 5570 mm.3 per gram per hour. For the rate flying at 
cruising speed the value was 20.6 cc. or 20,600 mm.3 per gram per hour; at bursts of speed 
it was 118 cc. per gram per hour. The data show a much higher intake by insect wing 
703 
PHYSIOLOGY 
muscle than by mammalian muscle. Calculated on the weight of the indirect wing muscles 
oxygen consumption for the bee works out as about forty times that of human muscle. 
Some useful data are given in table form by the above author on p. 326 including the 
following taken from Carpenter (1939) : 1 gram glucose requires for oxidation 726.2 cc. 0, 
at standard temperature and pressure; 1 gram of glycogen 829.3 cc. Other useful data in 
connection with work on respiration are: 1 mg. 0, at N.T.P. occupies 699.8 mm.3; 1 mg. 
CO, at N.T.P. occupies 505.9 mm. 3 ; 1 cc. of water at 20” C. and one atmosphere pressure 
absorbs 0.031 cc. 0, (Childs, 1934). (See Addenda, p. 719.) 
df) DIGESTION 
MECHANISM OF DIGESTION IN THE LARVA 
In the larva food particles filtered off by the pharyngeal fringes gradually collect at the 
back of the pharynx to form a bolus which is swallowed at intervals. According to Shipit- 
zima (1930, 1935) the larva of Anopheles maculipennis is capable of separating colloidal 
particles as small as 20 ,U,U in diameter, but not those of soluble starch which are 5 P,U in 
diameter or those of haemoglobin which measure 2-4 ,U,U in diameter. Feeding in this way 
considerable quantities of water are filtered free from suspended matter as first pointed out 
by Boyce and Lewis (1910). For Anopheles maculipennis Senior White (1928) estimated 
that as much as 1000 mm.3 (1 cc.) could be so filtered in a day. Shipitzima, for the fourth 
instar of this species at 17-21” C., gives only 100 mm.3 The present author found that nine 
half-grown fourth instar larvae of At?des aegypti at 26” C. in 24 hours cleared 60 ml. of 
culture medium as here recommended for culture diluted so that distinct dark type could 
just not be read at 5 cm. depth. The fluid was still very faintly turbid, but had ceased to 
yield food as was shown by the behaviour of the larvae which had ceased to feed normally 
and were rapidly browsing over the bottom. This gave a filtering of some 6.5 ml. per larva 
in 24 hours. 
The food when swallowed passes directly through the oesophagus and proventriculus to 
the mid-gut, where it becomes compacted to form a column of food material which extends 
as a long cylindrical mass through the greater part of the abdomen to the pylorus sur- 
rounded by a tubular sheath of peritrophic membrane. The food column with its peri- 
trophic sheath lies free in the lumen of the mid-gut with a considerable space between it and 
the gut wall. In the living larva rhythmical peristaltic contractions of the gut wall directed 
forwards and driving fluid into the gastric caeca, as described by Wigglesworth (1949), 
show up very clearly the distinction between the wall of the mid-gut and the motionless 
tube of peritrophic membrane, as also the considerable space between these structures. 
The food material is eventually passed out as the characteristic larval faeces, that is as 
cylindrical masses resembling portions of the food column, the length of which probably 
depends in part at least upon the nature of the food. In larvae parasitised by PeniciUium, 
as noted in the section on parasites, this character of the faeces is exaggerated, long lengths 
of cylindrical faeces remaining still attached at the anus. The material forming the food 
column, as also the faeces, is granular and amorphous with included larger particles of 
miscellaneous nature and usually with transparent crystalline grains of silica. 
The time taken for passage of food through the alimentary canal of the larva as shown by 
ingested particles of carmine is given by Purdy (1920) for larvae of Anopheles collected 
704 
DIGESTION 
from ricefields as from 3 l-45 minutes. Briick (1931), in Anopheles maculipennis, gives 
40 minutes as the time it took food to pass through, but this depended on the rate that food 
was taken in. It was not affected by the size of particles or nature of the food. In some 
observations made with half-grown fourth instar larvae of A&Yes aegypti at 26” C. feeding 
normally in the usual culture medium to which some suspension of carmine had been 
added the time taken for the carmine to reach the pylorus was about 30 minutes. 
Little is given in the literature regarding disposal of the food material and the following 
observations on the larvae of A. aegypti may be given. As well as by dissection and 
examination of sections, larvae suitably mounted under a cover-glass may be examined in 
the living state. The most satisfactory stage for this purpose is the third, or early fourth, 
instar when the parts are relatively transparent. Especially if arranged to give a lateral view 
of the abdomen movements of the food and concerned parts are well displayed. To aid 
such observations finely divided carmine may be added to the culture medium. It is also 
worth noting that, in contradistinction to the method used for drawing out the parts in the 
adult, the whole alimentary canal in the larva is readily drawn out intact from the thorax, 
provided only that the rectum is divided. The following observations may be made on the 
food column. 
Anteriorly the column starts abruptly immediately behind and in contact with the in- 
vaginated end of the oesophagus into the proventriculus, where it receives steady accessions 
of swallowed material (Fig. 27 (I), (2)). Since the peritrophic membrane takes origin from 
the outer fold of the proventriculus it surrounds the food column from its beginning and so 
cuts off any access of food material to the gastric caeca, which normally remain apparently 
empty and more or less transparent in contrast to the opaque column of food material. In 
apparent contradiction to this is the condition seen when suspension of carmine is used. In 
this case within such a short time as half an hour the gastric caeca appear packed with 
opaque red material equally with the mid-gut. On crushing them the material is seen to 
consist of fine carmine granules about 1.0,~ in diameter. Either in some way carmine 
particles are able to pass the peritrophic membrane and enter the caeca direct, or more 
probably carmine is removed in solution from the gut and after being passed forwards is 
taken up by the epithelium of the gastric caeca and reformed into granules. The remarkable 
fact is the short time in this latter case that it takes for the caeca to become so massively 
blocked with carmine. The condition has not been further explored. 
At its posterior end the food column also terminates as a rule abruptly, in this case at 
the pylorus or a little beyond (Fig. 28 (I), (2)). The abruptness here is to some extent 
exaggerated by the abrupt termination of the thick-walled mid-gut followed by the very 
thin-walled pyloric ampulla. In the larva, too, there is no sharp constriction at the pylorus 
as in the adult and the mid-gut wall makes what almost amounts to a narrow ring-like 
fold. All this serves to give the impression of an abrupt cut-off effect to the food column. 
Usually the column extends a little beyond the pylorus and in the living larva it may be 
seen slowly extending more and more into the upper part of the ileum until with a sudden 
contraction of the parts a length of the food column is detached and rapidly passes along 
the ileum to be lodged in the colon. Here it remains, usually with two or three similar 
masses, for a period before, with the emptying of the colon, its contents are passed rapidly 
down the narrow rectum and discharged as faeces. 
The above relates to the food material of the column. It still remains to follow up what 
happens to the peritrophic sheath. As depicted in figures this is usually shown terminating 
45 705 CH 
PHYSIOLOGY 
with the food column at the pylorus. Both dissections and the study of sections, however, 
show that the membrane is continued at least for some distance into the ileum. When 
drawn out in dissections it usually shows as a length of empty tube extending beyond the 
food material, becoming towards its end thinner and ending raggedly. In sections it is more 
difficult to follow than in the mid-gut, being folded and plicated in the narrow ileum. It 
appears, however, to be present at least as far as the colon and is sometimes to be made out 
in the upper part of this structure. In sections the thick-walled colon may be empty with 
a narrow lumen. At other times it contains food material and may be much distended by 
this. The rectum in sections is almost always empty and forms a narrow passage from the 
colon to the anus. 
The faeces of the A. aegypti larva, as cultured in the laboratory, consist of globular or 
short cylindrical fragments resembling portions of the food column. Those from the fourth 
instar larva were about 30,~ in diameter and up to 50,~ in length. Contrary to what is 
stated in the literature they showed no trace of peritrophic membrane. Another unexpected 
feature was the extent to which they were composed of fine silica granules. Similar granules 
were found to be present in the materials used for culture, but these were clearly much 
concentrated in the faeces. This and some other facts noted seemed to suggest that digestion 
in the larva might be more effective than at first sight appeared. Examination of the faeces 
of larvae of Anopheles atroparvus and of A. stephensi very kindly sent to me by Mr Shute 
of the Reference Malaria Laboratory, Horton, showed these to be very similar to those of 
AZdes aegypti larvae. In neither case was any peritrophic membrane present. The faecal 
masses in A. atroparvus were more or less globular or shortly cylindrical measuring up to 
about 40~ in diameter and 50,~ in greatest length. Those of A. stephensi larvae were smaller, 
being up to 20,~ in diameter, possibly from younger larvae. 
Briefly, the conclusion was formed that the food column is slowly moved on by pressure 
of added material past the open pylorus, the extruded portions being detached at intervals 
by muscular contractions and rapidly passed along the ileum to the colon where such 
fragments were retained for a period before being discharged as faeces. Regarding the 
peritrophic sheath there seemed two possibilities, namely that the membrane was con- 
tinually being formed and digested in the colon, or that it was a relatively static structure 
which extended to the colon where it ended. 
A point that finally may be referred to is the presence of the pyloric spines that have been 
described in the adult by Trembley (1951), and whether these play any part in the breaking 
off of the food column at the pylorus. It seems improbable that this could be an important 
factor since, whilst the spines are large and conspicuous structures covering the inner aspect 
of the pyloric ampulla in the adult where they measure up to 10,~ in length, only occasional 
transverse lines of exceedingly small and fine spines less than 1.0,~ in length can be seen 
with difficulty in the larva. 
DIGESTIVE PROCESSES IN THE LARVA 
Very little is known of the essential digestive processes in the larva. In A. albopictus Senior 
White (1926) found the pH of the alimentary canal to be in the alkaline range (74-8.8 in 
the gastric caeca; 9-9.4 in the mid-gut; and 76-8-O in the hind-gut). Richardson and 
Shepard (1930), in the larva of Culex, found the pH inside the peritrophic membrane to be 
6.2-82, and outside the membrane 86-9.8. Other authors dealing with determination of 
the pH of small quantities of fluid, some of whom give data regarding the mosquito, are 
706 
DIGESTION 
Haas (1919) ; Felton (1921); Jameson and Atkins (1921); Crozier (1923-4); Pantin (1923); 
Brown (1923-4). 
In the larva of A. aegypti Hinman (1933) found alkaline conditions in the gut and 
ascertained the presence of an amylase, an invertase and a protease. The protease acted 
in alkaline medium and, as previously found by Senior White, there was no protease 
acting in acid medium. According to Wigglesworth (1949) digestive secretions probably 
come from the salivary glands, the gastric caeca and the epithelium of the mid-gut, especially 
from its posterior portion. Anti-peristaltic movements drive fluid in the gut forward into 
the gastric caeca and bring about circulation of the digestive juices. Absorption of fat and 
of glycogen occurs in the gastric caeca as shown by deposits of these substances in this 
situation. Fat is also taken up by the cells of the anterior portion of the mid-gut, whilst a 
massive deposit of glycogen occurs in the epithelial cells of the posterior portion. 
Little is given in the literature regarding functions of the hind-gut in the larva except in 
relation to osmotic regulation, more especially by the rectum. The ileum would seem to be 
chiefly concerned with the passing on of the food material and is very noticeable as a 
muscular organ and as exhibiting active peristalsis. The colon from its large size and the 
peculiar character of its cells would appear to have some important function or functions 
which may include that previously suggested in connection with the peritrophic membrane. 
The rectum in the larva would appear to play but little part in digestion. As there is some 
possibility of confusion in the nomenclature of these two last-mentioned portions of the 
canal it may be well to state that the parts as referred to here are as recognised by Thompson 
(1905) and most authors dealing with the anatomy of the alimentary canal in the larva. 
DIGESTION IN THE ADULT* 
The change from the larva to the imago involves profound changes in the structure and 
functions of the parts concerned with digestion. From dealing in the larva with matter 
largely bacterial in character digestion in the imago is concerned with a relatively enormous 
mass of high-class protein matter composing the blood meal. It is not surprising therefore 
that the mid-gut is one of the relatively few organs the cells of which are completely 
replaced in metamorphosis, the old epithelium being digested and utilised as reserves. In 
connection with this replacement a condition of peculiar multiple chromosomal divisions, 
apparently designed to bring about rapid multiplication of the gut cells, has been described 
by Holt (19 17). In the imaginal gut the ingested blood, unlike food material in the larval 
gut, is not enclosed in well-marked peritrophic membrane, but has been shown to be sur- 
rounded by a very thin membranous sheet which appears to contain chitin (Yaguzhinskaya, 
1940; Rajindar Pal, 1943). Changes may be brought about in the ingested blood by the 
salivary secretion, including agglutination of the red cells and prevention of coagulation 
(Yorke and Macfie, 1924 ; Shute, 1948 ; see also under salivary gland secretion in chapter XX). 
These changes vary with the species. Even in the same genus some species may show the 
presence of agglutinins and anti-coagulants, whilst in others these do not occur. In 
A. aegypti the ingested blood undergoes coagulation and there is no agglutination of the 
red cells. The pH of the gut contents of the adult Culex pipiens is given by Popowr and 
Golzowa (1933) as 6.87-7.05 and in Anopheles maculipennis as 6.89. 
Little is known of the essential digestive processes. No enzymes appear to have been 
* For disposal of food intake to the gut or diverticula see chapter XXI. For stimuli connected with feeding see 
chapter XXIV. 
707 
PHYSIOLOGY 
definitely recorded. Wigglesworth (1949) notes that there is absorption of fluid and that 
the surface of the blood mass is blackened as the haemoglobin is digested. There appears 
to be no absorption of unaltered haemoglobin and no breakdown of the haematin 
nucleus. A description of the appearances is given by Huff (1934). Digestion begins at the 
stomach wall and proceeds inwardly, the stomach contents showing clear stratification. 
At 24 hours there is an amorphous serous-like layer just within the stomach wall followed 
by a layer of pigment and after this a layer of partially digested red cells, internal to which 
the blood appears normal. At 37 hours cellular blood elements have entirely disappeared. 
Studies of proteolytic digestion in adult AL;des aegypti have been given by Fisk (1950) and 
by Fisk and Shambaugh (1952). See also West and Eligh (1952). 
(g) CIRCULATION AND HAEMOLYMPH 
A description of the circulatory system, the haemolymph and haemocytes, together with the 
associated tissues, has already been given and only a brief review of points connected with 
the physiology of these structures remains necessary. 
Though the larva is an aquatic insect and the imago a terrestrial flying insect, differences 
in the circulatory system in the two stages are not very great and the same organs are 
largely present in both. In relation to physiology the system has been studied chiefly from 
the point of view of the mechanics of circulation and from that of the regulation of osmotic 
pressure of the haemolymph in the larva. 
THE HEART AND CIRCULATION 
A very full and detailed account of the heart and circulation in the imago, pupa and larva 
of Anopheles quadrimaculatus has recently been given by Jones (1954) (see also Jones, 
1952, 1953). The main organ of propulsion in the mosquito, as in insects generally, is the 
dorsal vessel. This consists of an abdominal portion with ostia, the heart, and a thoracic 
portion lacking ostia, the aorta, which at the level of the prothoracic commissure has a 
dilatation, the prothoracic aortic sinus (Jones, 1952). For further details see chapters XIV 
and XXVII. In the adult certain other organs and tissues assist in propulsion and direction 
of movement of the haemolymph, namely (1) the ventral diaphragm; (2) the septa in the 
appendages; (3) an accessory propulsatory organ in the scutellum. Movements of the ali- 
mentary canal and especially of the large ventral diverticulum may play some part in the 
larva (Jones, 1954). There are also in the imago the two small propulsatory organs at the 
bases of the antennae. 
The ventral diaphragm when exposed in dissections may, as noted by Jones (1954), be 
seen to contract slowly 3-15 times a minute. It is undeveloped in the larva, but cells that 
will eventually form it are present in the intersegmental region in the neighbourhood of the 
transverse nerves. The propulsatory organ in the scutellum according to the same author 
flutters discontinuously, but with extreme rapidity, at irregular and unpredictable intervals. 
There was no relation between such movements and the pulsation of the heart. 
In the larva pulsation of the heart can be readily observed in the living insect under the 
binocular. Pulsations are always forward, starting from the posterior end. Haemolymph 
from the peri-visceral blood sinus is drawn into the dorsal sinus, where it enters the ostial 
openings, principally those of the terminal chamber, from whence it is pumped into the 
708 
CIRCULATION AND HAEMOLYMPH 
head and then drawn backwards through the thorax and abdomen for recirculation. In the 
larva bleeding occurs when the thoracic or abdominal integument is cut, suggesting positive 
pressure in these regions. No bleeding occurs on decapitation in spite of continuing forward 
beats of the heart (Jones, 1954). 
For observing the heart in the living imago Jones uses one-day-old mosquitoes fed on 
sugar. These are examined either glued to the slide by the wings and tip of the abdomen, or 
fixed with the dorsal surface downwards and examined reversed. They may be studied 
intact, or with the head, legs and wings removed and kept alive in a damp petri dish. The 
glue used was Resin Adhesive no. 502 manufactured by Southern Adhesives Corporation. 
In the adult, pulsation in the dorsal vessel is generally about 150 per minute, travelling so 
rapidly that the heart appears to contract simultaneously. But closer examination shows the 
movement to be peristalsis. Pulsation in the adult, unlike that in the larva, is characterised 
by periods of reversal of direction, a period of forward beating being followed by a burst 
of backward beats. The alary muscles do not contract, but if these are cut the heart twists 
about from one side of the middle line to the other. In the adult there is possibly a general 
negative pressure, since bleeding does not occur on decapitation or on amputation of legs, 
wings or halteres. In the imago Jones (1954) notes that the amount of haemolymph seems 
to be exceedingly small. 
The rate of heart beat. For counting the heart beats Jones notes that it is best to time 
series of ten beats and take a mean, since counts covering an interval of a minute or more 
are apt to be interrupted by stoppages. The mean number of beats for Anopheles quadri- 
maculatus was 85.2 per minute. For A. maculipennis fourth instar larva Watson (1937) 
records 50-70 per minute when resting, and 90-100 per minute after much wriggling. 
Sautet and Audibert (1944) found with larvae of Culex and Theobaldia that submergence 
leading to asphyxia caused a rapid decrease in rate of heart beat with irregularity. Jones 
(1954) found that starvation did not affect the heart beat. 
The effect of rise in temperature was to increase the rate. In the larva of Anopheles 
quadrimaculatus the number of beats per minute was: 54.1 at 15” C., 91.97 at 25” C., 90-l 
at 28” C. and 139.26 at 35” C. (Jones, 1954). The rate of heart beat at different temperatures 
has an interest in relation to the temperature characteristic (,u) and whether the heart beat 
rate conforms to the Van t’Hoff-Arrhenius equation. It has been thought that the values 
found were compatible with this, which might indicate that the heart was not nervously 
controlled (Jones, 1954). Such a question is, however, beyond the scope of the present 
work and information if required must be obtained from authors dealing with the subject 
(see Jahn and Koel (1948) and references given by these authors). 
Regulation of the osmotic pressure of the haemolymph. The larva of A2des aegypti has been 
much used in research on osmotic pressure of the haemolymph and the means by which this 
is regulated under different salt conditions in the medium in which the larvae have been 
reared. 
The total quantity of haemolymph in the full-grown larva of A. aegypti as drawn off by 
a capillary pipette coated with paraffin is given by Wigglesworth (1938) as 3-4 mm.3 In 
a well-fed larva in tap-water the osmotic pressure is given by the same author as 0.75-0.89 
per cent NaCl equivalent. Only a relatively small part of this total pressure, as is usual in 
insect haemolymph, is derived from mineral salts, the chloride equivalent being only about 
O-3 per cent NaCl. The difference is made up by organic substances, thought to be largely 
709 
PHYSIOLOGY 
amino-acids (see Pratt, 1950). Furthermore, whilst the above is the proportion when larvae 
are grown in tap-water, the larva has the power, where the salt content of the medium is 
very low, to maintain the osmotic pressure with even smaller amounts of mineral salts. 
Thus, when grown in distilled water, a total osmotic pressure of 0.65 was found by Wiggles- 
worth to be maintained; but only 7.7 per cent of this was derived from chloride. 
Normally the chloride content is kept at the approximate level noted above, that is about 
O-3 per cent NaCl equivalent, whilst that of the medium in which the larva lives is much 
lower. Thus the NaCl per cent equivalent of tap-water is around 0.006. 
The larva also has the power, within limits, to maintain a normal haemolymph pressure 
in a medium in which the salt content is higher than that of the haemolymph. Thus Wiggles- 
worth found that larvae of A. aegypti maintained a normal salt equivalent of the haemo- 
lymph even when that of the medium was gradually raised to O-75 per cent when control 
began to break, and at 1.6 per cent the larvae were unable to live. The larvae of both 
A. aegypti and of Culexpipiens were thus able: (1) to retain chloride in a medium with low 
salt content, and (2) keep down chloride in a medium with a high salt content. In both 
these respects the larvae of Agdees aegypti were found more efficient than those of Culex 
pipiens. 
A particularly clear account of the nature of the mechanism at work in this respect is 
given by Ramsay (1953 a) (see also other papers listed under this author whose work has 
been largely responsible for what is known on this subject). The following is a brief 
resume : 
The general body surface of the larva is for practical purposes impermeable to water and 
salts. But the anal papillae are permeable and act as organs of absorption for water and 
salt (Wigglesworth, 1933 ; Koch, 1938). Fluids and salts enter the body through the papil- 
lae, pass into the haemolymph and are excreted by the Malpighian tubules. In the larva 
grown in tap-water the fluid so secreted by the tubules is slightly hypotonic to the haemo- 
lymph. Some, after passing into the gut, seems to be carried forward through the mid-gut 
and absorbed in the gastric caeca (Ramsay, 1953a). Some passes down the intestine to the 
rectum where salt is absorbed from it before it is passed out of the body. The net result, 
therefore, is retention of chloride. When, however, the salt content of the medium is 
gradually increased, the salt content of the fluid secreted by the tubules is also increased. 
But it is never greater, so long as control can be maintained, than that of the haemolymph 
and thus, since less chloride is correspondingly being taken up in the rectum, the total 
effect is elimination of salt. 
That the anal papillae play a part in such control also receives support from the fact 
that when larvae are grown in distilled water the anal papillae are increased in size, whereas 
as the salt content of the medium is progressively greater the size of the papillae is 
decreased. This is especially marked in larvae of Culex pipiens and to a less extent in the 
larvae of Ad;des aegypti which are more efficient in obtaining salt from a medium with low 
salt content. The same effect occurs in nature, the anal papillae of some species normally 
living in brackish water, for example A. detritus, being reduced in many cases to mere 
stumps. 
The work of Ramsay and his collaborators has also shown some interesting facts in 
regard to the regulation of salts of potassium. When larvae are reared in tap-water (as- 
suming that this contains some potassium) both sodium and potassium salts are taken up 
through the anal papillae and passed into the haemolymph. Both Na and K are also 
710 
CIRCULATION AND HAEMOLYMPH 
present in the fluid excreted by the Malpighian tubules. Both metal salts are also absorbed 
from such fluid in the rectum. When Na is in excess the concentration in the tubules is 
increased and absorption from the rectum held in abeyance as described above. The 
concentration of K in the urine, however, is always greater than in the haemolymph and 
consequently K is taken up from the rectum, so that there is a steady circulation, potassium 
being secreted by the tubules, being reabsorbed from the rectum and mid-gut and again 
secreted (Ramsay, 1953a, b). 
In addition to sodium chloride the concentration of some other salts in the living 
medium may have importance and may affect different species differently (Bates, 1939; 
Woodhill, 1942). Of interest also are the analysis by Bradford and Ramsay (1949) of mos- 
quito tissue for salts and the formula given by these authors for an insect Ringer’s solution 
based on the tissues of A&?es aegypti. The following is the composition of the solution in 
grams per litre : NaCl, 7.5 ; KCl, 0.35 ; CaCl, ,0*21; M/I 50 K phosphate buffers to pH 6% 
For information on amino-acids of insects’ blood see Pratt (1950). 
REFERENCES 
(a) GENETICS AND CHROMOSOMAL STRUCTURE 
BAKER, J. R. (1945). Cytological Technique. Ed. 2. Methuen and Co., London. 
BERGER, C. A. (1936). Observations on the relation between salivary gland chromosomes and 
multiple chromosome complexes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Wash. 22, 186-7. 
BERGER, C. A. (1938a). Cytology of metamorphosis in the Culicinae. Nature, Lond., 141,834-5. 
BERGER, C. A. (1938 b). Multiplication and reduction of somatic chromosome groups as a regular 
development process in the mosquito, Culexpipiens. Carnegie Inst. Wash. Publ. 496,209-32. 
BOGOJAWLENSKY, K. S. (1934). Studien iiber Zellengrijssen und Zellenwachstum. 2. Zelfirsch. 
22, 47-53. 
BOLLES LEE (1950). The Microtomist’s Vade Mecum. Ed. 11. J. and A. Churchill, London. 
CALLAN, H. G. and MONTALENTI, G. (1947). Chiasma interference in mosquitoes. .J. Genet. 48, 
119-34. 
CARTER, L. A. (1918). The somatic mitosis of Stegomyia fasciata. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 63, 375-86. 
DARLINGTON, C. D. (1937). Recent Advances in Cytology. Ed. 2. J. and A. Churchill, London. 
DARLINGTON, C. D. and LA COUR, L. F. (1942). The HandZing of Chromosomes. George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd., London. 
FRIZZI, G. (1947). Salivary gland chromosomes of Anopheles. Nature, Lond., 160, 226-7. 
FRIZZI, G. (1953). Extension of the salivary chromosome method to Anopheles claviger, quadri- 
maculatus and aquasalis. Nature, Lond., 171, 1072. 
GILCHRIST, B. M. and HALDANE, J. B. S. (1947). Sex linkage and sex determination in a mosquito, 
CuZex molestus. Hereditas, Lund, 33, 175-90. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1956). Genetic differences affecting egg-laying in the mosquito Agdes (Stegomyia) 
aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 362-74. 
GOLDSCHMIDT, R. (1938). Physiological Genetics. New York. 
GRELL, S. M. (1946a). Cytological studies in Culex. I. Somatic reduction divisions. Genetics, 31, 
60-76. 
GRELL, S. M. (1946 b). Cytological studies in Culex. II. Diploid and meiotic divisions. Genetics, 
31, 77-94. 
HALDANE, J. B. S. (1941). New Paths in Genetics. London. 
HANCE, R. T. (1917). The somatic mitoses in the mosquito CuZex pipiens. J. Morph. 28, 579-88. 
HOLT, C. M. (1917). Multiple complexes in the alimentary tract of Culexpipiens. J. Morph. 29, 
607-17. 
JENSEN, D. V. (1955). Methods for dissecting salivary glands in mosquito larvae and pupae. 
Mosquito News, 15, 215-16. 
7== 
REFERENCES 
KALMUS, H. and CRUMP, L. M. (1948). Genetics. Pelican Book. 
KITZMILLER, J. B. (1953). Mosquito genetics and cytogenetics. Rev. Bras. Malarial. 5, 285-359. 
KITZMILLER, J. B. and CLARKE, C. C. (1952). Salivary gland chromosomes in Culex mosquitoes. 
Genetics, 37, 596. 
LA COUR, L. (1931). (Quoted by Bolles Lee, Ed. 10, 1937, p. 681.) J. R. Micr. Sot. 51, 119. 
LAVEN, H. (1956). X-Ray induced mutations in mosquitoes. Proc. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. (A), 31, 
17. 
MATTINGLY, P. F. (1956). Species hybrids in mosquitoes. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. Lond. 108, 21-36. 
MOFFETT, A. A. (1936). The origin and behaviour of chiasmata. XIII. Diploid and tetraploid 
Culex pipiens. Cytologia, 7, 184-97. 
SCHUH, J. E. (1951). Some effects of colchicine on the metamorphosis of Culex pipiens Linn. 
Chromosoma, 4, 456-69. 
SINNOTT, E. W. and DUNN, L. C. (1939). Principles of Genetics. New York. 
SNYDER, L. H. (1940). The Principles of Heredity. Ed. 2. New York. 
STEVENS, N. M. (1910). The chromosomes in the germ cells of Culex. J. Exp. Zool. 8,207-17. 
STEVENS, N. M. (1911). Further studies on heterochromosomes in mosquitoes. Biol. Bull. 20, 
109-20. 
STURTEVANT, A. H. and BEADLE, G. W. (1940). Introduction to Genetics. 
SUTTON, E. (1942). Salivary gland type chromosomes in mosquitoes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Wash. 
28, 268-72. 
TAYLOR, M. (1914). The chromosome complex of Culexpipiens. Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 60, 377-98. 
TAYLOR, M. (1917). The chromosome complex of Culex pipiens. II. Fertilisation. Quart. J. 
Micr. Sci. 62, 287-301. 
WA~DINGTON, G. H. (1939). Introduction to Modern Genetics. London, George Allen & Unwin Ltd. 
WHITING, P. W. (1917). The chromosomes of the common house mosquito CuZex pipiens L. 
J. Morph. 28, 523-63. 
(b) HORMONES 
BODENSTEIN, D. (1945). The corpora allata of mosquitoes. 44th Rep. Connect. State Entomologist. 
Connect. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 488, pp. 396-405. 
BODENSTEIN, D. (1953). The role of hormones in moulting and metamorphosis. In Roeder’s 
Insect Physiology. See under Roeder, K. D. 
CAZAL, P. (1948). Les glandes endocrines r&troc&brales des insectes (Etude morphologique). 
Bull. Biol. Fr. Belg. Suppl. 32, 227 pp. 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1956). Hormonal control of ovary development in mosquitoes. J. Exp. Biol. 
33, 21 l-23. 
DAY, M. F. (1940). Neurosecretory cells in the ganglia of Lepidoptera. Nature, Lond., 145,264. 
DAY, M. F. (1943). The functions of the corpus allatum in muscoid Diptera. Biol. Bull. 84, 
127-40. 
DETINOVA, T. S. (1945). On the influence of glands of internal secretion upon the ripening of the 
gonads and the imaginal diapause of Anopheles maculipennis (in Russian). 2002. Zh. 34, 
291-8. Quoted by Clements (1955). 
FUKUDA, S. (1940). Induction of pupation in silkworm by transplanting the prothoracic gland. 
Proc. Imp. Acad. Tokyo, X6,414-16. 
FUKUDA, S. (1944). The hormonal mechanism of larval moulting and metamorphosis in the silk- 
worm. J. Fac. Sci. Tokyo Imp. Univ. Sec. IV, 6, 477-532. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1956). Initiation and promotion of ovarian development in the mosquito, Acdes 
(Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 50, 375-80. 
GOMORI, G. (1941). Observations with differential stains on human islets of Langerhaus. Amer. 
J. Path. 17, 395-406. 
HANSTROM, B. (1938). Zwei Probleme betreffs der hormonal Lokalisation im Insektenkopf. 
Acta Univ. Lund. avd. 2, 39, 1-17. 
LYONET, P. (1762). Trait& anatomique de la chenille qui ronge le bois de Saule. Amsterdam. 
NABERT, A. (1913). Die corpora allata der Insekten. Z. wiss. Zool. 104, 18 l-358. 
REFERENCES 
POSSOMPES, B. (1953). Recherches experimentales sur la determination de la metamorphose de 
Calliphora erythrocephala Meig. Arch. Zool. Exp. G&z. 89, 203-64. 
THOMSEN, E. (1952). Functional significance of the neurosecretory brain cells and the corpus 
cardiacurn in the female blowfly, Calliphora erythrocephala Meig. J. Exp. Biol. 29, 137-72. 
VERSON, E. and BISSON, E. (1891). Cellule glandulaire ipostigmatiche nel Bombyx mori. Bull. Sot. 
Ent. Ital. 23, 3-20. 
WEYER, F. (1928). Untersuchungen tiber die Keimdrtisen bei Hymenopterenarbeiterinnen. 
Z. wiss. Zool. 131, 345-501. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1934). The physiology of ecdysis in Rhodnius prolixus (Hemiptera). 
II. Factors controlling moulting and metamorphosis. Quart. J. Mcr. Sci. 77, 191-222. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1948). The functions of the corpus allatum in Rhodnius prolixus (Hemi- 
ptera). J. Exp. Biol. 25, l-14. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1951 a). Source of moulting hormones in Rhodnius. Nature, Lond., 168, 
558. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1951 b). Metamorphosis in insects. Proc. R. Ent. Sot. London (C), 15, 
78. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1954). The Physiology of Insect Metamorphosis. Cambridge Univ. Press. 
WILLIAMS, C. M. (1949). The prothoracic glands of insects in retrospect and in prospect. Biol. 
Bull. 97, 111-14. 
(C) RESERVES 
CHRISTOPHERS, S. R. (1911). Development of the egg follicle in Anophelines. Paludism, 2,73-88. 
CLEMENTS, A. N. (1955). The source of energy for flight in mosquitoes. J. Exp. Biol. 32, 547-54. 
GILLETT, J. D. (1955). Behaviour difference in two strains of Aedes aegypti. Nature, Lond., 176, 
124-6. 
GILLIES, M. T. (1955). The pre-gravid phase of ovarian development in Anopheles funestus. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 49, 320-5. 
HOCKING, B. (1952). Autolysis of flight muscles in a mosquito. Nature, Lond., 169, 1101. 
HOCKING, B. (1953). The intrinsic range and speed of fhght of insects. Trans. R. Ent. Sot. London, 
104, 223-345. 
MER, G. G. (1936). Experimental study on the development of the ovary in Anopheles elutus 
Edw. (Dipt. Culic.). Bull. Ent. Res. 27, 351-9. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1952). Flight-tone and wing-stroke frequency of insects and the dynamics of 
insect flight. Nature, Lond., 170, 1057. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1954a). On the fuel consumption of the honeybee (Apis mellzjka L.) in flight 
experiments. Ann. Zool. Sot. Vanamo, 16, no. 5, 27 pp. 
SOTAVALTA, 0. (1954b). On the thoracic temperature of insects in flight. Ann. Zool. Sot. Vanamo, 
16, no. 8, 22 pp. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1942). The storage of protein, fat, glycogen and uric acid in the fatbody 
and other tissues of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. Biol. 19, 56-77. 
(d) THE INTEGUMENT 
PRYOR, M. G. M. (1940). On the hardening of the cuticle of insects. Proc. Roy. Sot. B, 128, 
393-407. 
RICHARDS, A. G. (1951). The Integument of Arthropods. Univ. of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 
and Oxford Univ. Press, London. 
RICHARDS, A. G. (1953). The integument. In Roeder’s Insect Physiology. See Roeder, K. D., 
under section (b). 
RICHARDS, A. G. and ANDERSON, T. F. (1942). Electron microscope studies of insect cuticle with a 
discussion of electron optics to this problem. J. Morph. 71, 135-71. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933). The function of the anal gills of the mosquito larva. J. Exp. Biol. 
10, 16-26. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1947). The epicuticle of an insect, Rhodnius prolixus (Hemiptera). Proc. 
Roy. Sot. B, 134, 163-81. 
7=3 
REFERENCES 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1948). The insect epicuticle. Proc. 8th Internat. Congr. Entorn. 1948, 
pp. 307-9. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1957). The physiology of insect cuticle. Ann. Rev. Ent. 2, 37-54. 
(e) RESPIRATION 
BABAK, E. (1912). Zur Physiologie der Atmung bei Culex. Int. Rev. Hydrobiol. 5, 81-90. 
CARPENTER, T. M. (1939). Tables, factors and formulae for computing respiratory exchange and 
biological transformations of energy. Publ. Carnegie Inst. 303, B, 142 pp. 
CHILDS, W. H. J. (1934). Physical Constants. Methuen and Co., London. 
DA COSTA LIMA, S. (1914). Contributions to the biology of the Culicidae. Observations on the 
respiratory process of the larva. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz, 6, 18-34. 
HOCKING, B. (1953). See under section (c). 
IMMS, A. D. (1907). On the larval and pupal stages of Antipheles maculipennis Meigen. J. Hyg., 
Camb., 7, 291-316. 
KOCH, A. (1920). Messende Untersuchungen iiber den Einfluss von Sauerstoff und Kohlensgure 
auf Culex-larven der Submersion. ZooZ. Jb., Physiol., 37, 361-492. 
KROGH, A. (1941). The Comparative Physiology of Respiratory Mechanisms. Philadelphia. 
MACFIE, J. W. S. (1917). The limitations of kerosene as a larvicide with some observations on the 
cutaneous respiration of mosquito larvae. Bull. Ent. Res. 7, 277-95. 
SEN, S. K. (1915). Observations on respiration of Culicidae. Ind. J. Med. Res. 2, 681-97. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1930). A theory of tracheal respiration in insects. Proc. Roy. Sot. B, 
106, 229-50. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1938). The regulation of osmotic pressure and chloride concentration in 
the haemolymph of mosquito larvae. J. Exp. BioZ. 15, 235-47. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1954). Growth and regeneration in the tracheal system of an insect 
Rhodnius prolixus (Hemiptera). Quart. J. Micr. Sci. 95, 115-37. 
(f) DIGESTION 
BOYCE, R. and LEWIS, F. C. (1910). The effect of mosquito larvae upon drinking water. Ann. 
Trop. Med. Parasit. 3, 591-4. 
BROWN, J. H. (1923-4). The calorimetric determination of the hydrogen ion concentration of small 
amounts of fluid. J. Lab. CZin. Med. 9, 239. 
BR~~cK, R. (193 1). Zur Frage iiber die Ernghrung der Larven von Anopheles maculipennis. Trav. 
Sot. Nat. Lening. 60, 15. Abstract in Rev. AppZ. Ent. 19, 144. 
CROZIER, W. J. (1923-4). Hydrogen ion concentration within the alimentary tract of insects. 
J. Gen. Physiol. 6, 289-93. 
FELTON, J. D. (1921). A calorimetric method of determining the hydrogen ion concentration in 
small quantities of solution. J. BioZ. Chem. 46, 299. 
FISK, F. W. (1950). Studies on proteolytic digestion in adult Ak;des aegypti mosquitoes. Ann. Ent. 
Sot. Amer. 43, 555-72. 
FISK, F. W. and SHAMBAUGH, G. F. (1952). Protease activity in adult Ai;des aegypti mosquitoes 
as related to feeding. Ohio J. Sci. 52, 80-8. 
HAAS, A. R. C. ( 19 19). Calorimetric determination of hydrogen ionconcentrationin small quantities 
of solution. J. BioZ. Chem. 38, 49. 
HINMAN, E. H. (1933). The presence of enzymes in the digestive tract of mosquito larvae. Ann. 
Ent. Sot. Amer. 26, 45-52. 
HOLT, C. M. (1917). See under section (a). 
HUFF, C. G. (1934). Comparative studies on susceptible and insusceptible CuZex pipiens in 
relation to infections with Plasmodium cathemerium and P. relicturn. Amer. J. Hyg. 19, 
123-47. 
JAMESON, A. P. and ATKINS, W. R. (1921). On the physiology of the silkworm. Biochem. J. 15, 
209-12. 
PANTIN, C. F. A. (1923). The determination of pH of microscopical bodies. Nature, Lond., 111,81. 
REFERENCES 
POPOWR, P. P. and GOLZOWA, R. D. (1933). Zur Kenntnis der Wasserstoffionenkonzentration im 
Darmkanale einiger blutsaugender Arthropoden. Arch. Schz$s.- u. Tropenhyg. 37, 465-6. 
PURDY, M. S. (1920). Biological investigation of Californian ricefields relative to mosquito 
breeding. Publ. Hlth Rep. Wash. 35, 2556-70. 
RAJINDAR PAL (1943). On the histological structure of the midgut of mosquitoes. J. Malar. Inst. 
India, 5, 247-50. 
RICHARDSON, C. H. and SHEPARD, H. H. (1930). The effect of hydrogen-ion concentration on the 
toxicity of nicotine, pyridine and methyl pyrrolidine to mosquito larvae. J. Afiic. Res. 41, 
33748. 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1926). Physical factors in mosquito oecology. Bull. Ent. Res. 16, 187-248. 
SENIOR WHITE, R. (1928). Algae and the food of Anopheline larvae. Ind. J. Med. Res. 15,969-88. 
SHIPITZIMA, N. K. (1930). On the role of the organic colloids of water in the feeding of the larva 
of Anopheles maculipennis (in Russian). Bull. Inst. Tech. Biol. Univ. Perm. 7, 171. Abstract in 
Rev. Appl. Ent. 19, 25. 
SHIPITZIMA, N. K. (1935). Grandeur maximum et minimum des particles pouvant Ctre avalees 
par les larves d’Anopheles maculipennis. Med. Parasit., Moscow, 4, 381-9. Abstract in Rev. 
Appl. Ent. 24, 70. 
SIIUTE, P. G. (1948). The comparative distribution of oocysts of human malaria parasites on the 
stomach wall of Anopheles. Trans. R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 42, 324. 
THOMPSON, M. T. (1905). The alimentary canal of the mosquito. Proc. Boston Sot. Nat. Hist. 32, 
145-202. 
TREMBLEY, H. L. (1951). Pyloric spines in mosquitoes. J. Nat. Malar. Sot. 10, 213-15. 
WEST, A. S. and ELIGH, G. S. (1952). The rate of digestion of blood in mosquitoes: precipitin 
test studies. Canad. J. 2001. 30, 267-72. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1949). Physiology of Mosquitoes. In Boyd’s Malariology, 1. W. B. 
Saunders, Philadelphia and London. 
YAGUZHINSKAYA, L. W. (1940). See references in ch. XXVI (a), p. 599. 
YORKE, W. and MACFIE, J. W. S. (1924). The action of the salivary secretion of the mosquito and 
Glossina tachinoides on human blood. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 18, 103-8. 
(g) CIRCULATION AND HAEMOLYMPH 
BATES, M. (1939). Use of salt solutions for the demonstration of physiological differences between 
the larvae of certain European Anopheles mosquitoes. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 19, 357-83. 
BRADFORD, S. and RAMSAY, R. W. (1949). Analysis of mosquito tissues for sodium and potassium 
for a physiological salt solution. Fed. Proc. 8, 1. 
JAHN, T. J. and KOEL, B. S. (1948). The effect of temperature in the frequency of beat of the 
grasshopper heart. Ann. Ent. Sot. Amer. 41, 258-66. 
JONES, J. C. (1952). Prothoracic aortic sinuses in Anopheles, Culex and Aedes. Proc. Ent. Sot. 
Wash. 54, 244-6. 
JONES, J. C. (1953a). On the heart in relation to circulation of haemocytes in insects. Ann. Ent. 
Sot. Amer. 46, 366-72. 
JONES, J. C. (19533). A chamber for observations on living Anopheline mosquitoes. Science, 
117, 42. 
JONES, J. C. (1954). The heart and associated tissues of AnopheZes quadrimaculatus Say (Diptera: 
Culicidae). J. Morph. 94, 71-124. 
KOCH, H. J. (1938). The absorption of chloride ions by the anal papillae of Diptera larvae. J. Exp. 
Biol. 15, 152-60. 
PRATT, J. J. (1950). A qualitative analysis of free amino-acids in insect blood. Ann. Ent. Sot. 
Amer. 43, 573-80. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (1949). A new method of freezing-point determination for small quantities. J. Exp. 
Biol. 26, 57-64. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (195Oa). Osmotic regulation in mosquito larvae. J. Exp. Biol. 27, 145-57. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (1950b). The determination of sodium in small volumes of fluid by flame photo- 
metry. J. Exp. Biol. 27, 417-19. 
715 
REFERENCES 
RAMSAY, J. A. (195 1). Osmotic regulation in mosquito larvae: the role of the maliphighian 
tubules. J. Exp. Biol. 28, 62-73. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (1952). The excretion of sodium and potassium by the malpighian tubules of 
Rhodnius. J. Exp. Biol. 29, 110-26. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (1953a). Exchanges of sodium and potassium in mosquito larvae. J. Exp. Biol. 
30,79-89. 
RAMSAY, J. A. (1953b). The active transport of potassium by the malpighian tubules of insects. 
J. Exp. Biol. 30, 358-69. 
SAUTET, J. and AUDIBERT, Y. (1944). Le rythme cardiaque des larves de moustiques en asphyxie. 
C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris, 138, 679-80. 
WATSON, G. I. (1937). Some observations on mosquito larvae dying in anti-malarial oils andother 
substances. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 31, 417-26. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1933). The adaptation of mosquito larvae to salt water. J. Exp. Biol. 10, 
27-37. 
WIGGLESWORTH, V. B. (1938). See under section (e). 
WOODHILL, A. R. (1942). A comparison of factors affecting the development of three species of 
mosquitoes (Agdes (Pseudoskusea) concolor; AZdes (Stegomyia) aegypti Linnaeus and Culex 
(Culex) fatigans Wied.). Proc. Linn. Sot. N.S. W. 6’7, 95-7. 
ADDENDA 
CHAPTER I (a), p. 1. The name mosquito 
Under the name ‘mosquito’ something might have been said of the generic name A&Yes, which 
appears in the title of this book. Aedes was the name for a third genus additional to Culex and 
Anopheles designated by Meigen (18 1 S), solely for the European species Culex cinereus. In the 
brief note establishing the genus the heading appears as ‘III. Schnackenmukke. AEDES. Hoffmgg.’ 
and after description of the generic characters follows a description of the species under the 
heading ‘I. Aed. cinereus Hoffmgg.‘. In this, after a few lines of description, Meigen says : ‘ Diese 
ist alles, was mir Hr. Justizrath Wiedemann von dieser Art bemerkt hat, die ich weiter nicht 
kenne. Den Gattungsnamen hat der Hr. Graf v. Hoffmansegg, in dessen Sammlung sie sich 
befindet, aus dem Griechischen Aedes beschwerlich, gebildet.’ The meaning of the Greek word 
Aedes without the diaeresis is ‘ a building’ ; with the diaeresis it means, as stated by Meigen, 
‘troublesome ’ (beschwerlich), which was clearly the meaning intended. But Meigen gave the name 
without the diaeresis, and as a result there was later some controversy as to whether in strict 
taxonomy the name of the genus should be given without the diaeresis and some even so used it. 
CHAPTER II (d), p. 39. Temperature limit to the species 
A recent contribution to the limiting temperature for distribution of Ai;des aegypti is that by 
Smith and Love (1958), who, studying survival of Aedes aegypti in south-west Georgia, U.S.A., 
found that an average weekly temperature below 60” F. (15.6” C.) killed most larvae, but in 
sheltered positions some survived when the weekly temperature was as low as 48” F. (9.1” C.). 
This is very close to the limit assigned in the text: Smith, W. W. and Love, G. J. (1958). Winter 
and spring survival of Ai;des aegypti in South Western Georgia. Amer. J, Trop. Med. 7, 309-l 1. 
CHAPTER IV (a), p. 79. Sylvan yellow fever 
Among recent accounts of mosquitoes concerned in sylvan yellow fever are: Trapido, H. and 
Galindo, P. (1957). Mosquitoes associated with sylvan yellow fever near Almirante, Panama. 
Amer. J. Trop. Med. 6, 114-44; Galindo, P. and Trapido, H. (1957). Forest mosquitoes 
associated with sylvan yellow fever in Nicaragua. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 6, 145-52. 
CHAPTER IV (a), p. 82. Virus diseases 
A special trap for collecting mosquitoes in connection with virus research is described by 
Lumsden, W. H. R. (1958). A trap for insects biting small vertebrates. Nature, Lond. 18, 
809-20. 
CHAPTER V, p. 104. Technique for rearing 
Dr Ann Bishop, F.R.s., informs me that some modifications have been made by her in the rearing 
cage here described as used at the Molten0 Institute. As originally employed it was quite 
adequate for rearing and manipulating Culex pipiens and Culex molestus, but there were apt to 
be escapes with Ad;des aegypti. This is entirely avoided by using a broad band of elastic material 
fltting tightly around the bottom of the cylinder and holding cylinder and dish closely together. 
This also makes the apparatus more secure and easily handled. The band is formed from a 
strip of fine meshed nylon net (corset elastic) about 5 in. wide stitched into a band with strong 
thread and double seam. About a yard is required to make the band. Other improvements are: 
lining the metal cylinder with white paper held in place with surgical plaster; lining the hole 
through the muslin top with surgical plaster stuck both underneath and above the muslin; fixing 
the muslin netting with two or three strands of round hat elastic. 
7=7 
ADDENDA 
CHAPTER V, p. 124. Preparing celloidin double-embedded sections for mounting 
In the procedure given for treating double-embedded sections for mounting it is stated that 
carbol-xylol is largely responsible for removing the celloidin. It is to be noted, however, that 
normally celloidin is not soluble either in carbol-xylol or in a mixture of carbol-xylol and 
alcohol. If, therefore, this is found necessary, a rinse of equal parts alcohol and ether should 
be given after the xylol. Possibly the use of a warm slide or some other detail as used by the 
author may be the reason this has not usually been found necessary. 
CHAPTER V, p. 126. Special techniques 
Among papers giving information on the use of radio-isotopes in research on and control of 
mosquitoes may be noted: Bruce-Chwatt, L. J. (1956). Radio-isotopes for research on and 
control of mosquitoes. Bull. Org. Mond. Sante, 15, 491-511; Ascher, K. R. S. (1957). Investiga- 
tions on a fluorocarbon as ‘ O.I.T.C.-agent ’ (Oviposition-inhibitory-tarsal-contact-agent) in 
mosquitoes. Riv. Malarial. 26, 209-l 5. 
CHAPTER VIII, p. 177. Embryology 
Professor Colvard Jones has since drawn my attention to a paper by Ivanova-Kazas, O.M. 
(1949). Embryological development of Anopheles maculipennis Mg. (in Russian) Akad. Nauk. 
S.S.S.R. Inv. Ser. Biol. 1949, 160-70. Some embryological changes in the egg are also described 
by Gander (1951), see refs. p. 286. 
CHAPTER X (a), p. 227 (footnote). Larval instar mouthparts 
The mouthparts of the larval instars of Anopheles quadrimaculatus are described by Shalaby, 
A. M. (1956). On the mouthparts of the larval instars of Anopheles quadrimaculatus (Say). Sot. 
Ent. d’Egypte Bull. 40, 137-74. 
CHAPTER XI (b), p. 255. Surface tension 
The effects of surface tension on larval development of six species of mosquito including 
Aedes aegypti have been studied by: Singh, K. R. P. and Micks, Don W. (1957). The effects of 
surface tension on mosquito development. Mosq. News, 17, 70-3. None of the forms experi- 
mented with emerged at 41 or less or 78 or more dynes per cm., though with Aedes aegypti at 
41 dynes some emergences were incomplete. 
CHAPTER XI (g), p. 261. Food requirements of the larva 
Besides the authors given in the footnote, the following deal with the part played by amino 
acids in nutrition of the larva. Singh, K. R. P. and Micks, Don W. (1957). Synthesis of amino- 
acids in Aedes aegypti L. Mosq. News, 17, 248-9; Singh, K. R. P. and Brown, A. W. A. (1957). 
Nutritional requirements of Aedes aegypti L. J. Insect. Physiol. 1, 199-220; Terzion, L. A., 
Irreverre, F. and Stahler, N. (1957). A study of nitrogen and uric acid patterns in the excreta and 
body tissues of adult Aedes aegypti. J. Insect. Physiol. 1, 221-8. 
CHAPTER XV (b), p. 355. Pupal chaetotaxy of Aedes aegypti 
Senevet and Andarelli have dealt with the systematics of pupae of the Aedes of North Africa 
and describe the pupal chaetotaxy of Aedes aegypti there occurring: Senevet, G. and Andarelli, L. 
(1958). Le genus Aedes en Afrique du Nord. II. Les nymphes. Ann. Inst. Pasteur d’AZge?ie, 36, 
266-93. A further short note on Aedes aegypti in Algeria is also given by: Senevet, G., Andarelli, 
L. and Monpere, H. (1958). Aedes aegypti & Alger. Ann. Inst. Pasteur d’AZgerie, 36, 506-7. The 
authors note that though the species appears to be rarer than formerly in towns in Algeria it is 
present always in crowded Algerian areas and probably in most coastal towns of North Africa. 
ADDENDA 
CHAPTER XXI (i), p. 496. Treatment of mosquito bites 
An account of anti-histamine compounds including a reference to ‘anthisan’ is given by Burn, 
J. H. (1958). The anti-histamine compounds. Brit. Med. J. 4 October 1958, 845-56. 
CHAPTER XXV (e), p. 561. Insecticide resistance 
Among a number of recent papers on insecticide resistance may be noted: Busvine, J. R. (1956). 
A survey of measurements of the susceptibility of different mosquitoes to insecticides. Bull. World 
Hlth Org. 15, 787-91; Busvine, J. R. (1957). A critical review of techniques for testing of insecti- 
cides. Commonw. Inst. Entom. London; Brown, A. W. A. (1958). The insecticide-resistance problem. 
A review of developments in 1956 and 1957. Bull. World HZth Org. 18,309-21. The last mentioned 
gives species resistant to particular insecticides and description of resistance in Trinidad of Aedes 
aegypti. 
CHAPTER XXVI (a), p. 568. The Zabral canal 
In the paper by Bhatia and Wadia (1957), referred to in the footnote on this page, the authors 
refer to the reason for the binding of the stylets in the proboscis and consider that surface tension 
alone is unlikely to be so effective as observation shows the binding to be. They note that in some 
insects the parts are effectively bound by their interlocking and they think it possible that the 
septa now described by them may serve the function of keeping the hypopharynx, mandibles and 
maxillae firmly applied against the ventral gutter-like opening of the labrum-epipharynx. The 
rings have been observed in both sexes of Aedes aegypti and in a number of species of Anopheles 
and CuZex fatigans. They are best seen in fresh preparations examined in glycerine or water. 
CHAPTER XXX (i), p. 678. The mating plug and ovariole funicle 
Gillies (1956) found that the mating plug described by him and referred to in the footnote on 
this page can be observed in females recently fertilised and was absorbed during the 36 hr. 
following. It therefore gives a very precise indication of time of fertilization. 
Recently a still further means towards ascertaining the age and condition of captured females 
has been described by Lewis (1958). This relates to the condition of the ovariole funicle or the 
structure linking the ovariole to the oviduct. After oviposition this is much enlarged, giving 
evidence that the insect has already passed through at least one oviposition. Lewis, D. J. (1958). 
The recognition of nulliparous and parous Anopheles gambiae by examining the ovarioles. Trans. 
R. Sot. Trop. Med. Hyg. 52, 456-61. 
C HA P T ER XXX (j), p. 68 1. Male reproductive system 
The nomenclature given in the text is mainly based on the work of Abdul Nasr on the organs 
in Nematocera. Prof. Colvard Jones, however, informs me that he and Prof. Snodgrass feel 
that the duct labelled penis cavity in the text on p. 681 and in Fig. 85 (1) and (7), would be more 
appropriately termed the true ejacuzatory duct, and the organ labelled ejd the true seminal vesicles, 
this being more in keeping with what is known for other insects. 
C H A P TER XXX1 (e) p. 704. Oxygen uptake 
An important paper on respiration of mosquito larvae dealing with oxygen uptake is : Mercado, 
T.I., Trembley, H. L. and Von Brand, T. (1956). Observations on the oxygen consumption of 
some adult mosquitoes. Physiol. Comp. et Oecolog. 4, 200-8. 
The present author’s observations were made under conditions as near as possible to those 
made by him in previous communications, see Christophers and Fulton (1938). Ann. Trop. Med. 
Parasit. 32, 43. 

INDEX 
The figures in bold type refer to the principal references 
Abdomen 
imago 
description, 401, 410, 454 
abdominal pleurae, 456, 485, 488, 701 
of the gorged insect, 406,485,488 
of gynandromorphs, 33, 34 
muscles of, 582, 584, 596 
nerves of, 640 
in oviposition, 504, 509 
scaling of, 401, 454 
segmentation, 454 
spiracles, 456, 605, 613 
terminal segments, 26, 28, 362,456, 465, 679 
tracheation, 608, 612 
of varietal forms, 27, 28, 29 
larva 
description, 196 
chaetotaxy, 216, 236, 240 
in ecdysis, 228, 231 
at eclosion, 159, 164 
growth measurements, 278 
of the instars, 236, 240 
muscles of, 222, 238, 310, 314, 329, 334 
nerves of, 324 
in pupation, 248 
respiratory siphon, 2 18 
segmentation, 196, 208 
spiracular puncta, 298 
terminal segments, 196, 209, 218, 236, 241 
tracheation, 302, 305 
pupa 
description, 355, 361, 363, 385 
chaetotaxy, 364 
in emergence, 389, 392, 395 
muscles of, 374, 376, 377, 597 
terminal segments, 362, 364 
tracheation, 369 
Abyssinia, 43 
Acarids, 60, 62, 63, 68 
Accessory gland (caecus), 346, 351, 464, 465, 674, 
679, 680 
Accessory gland (male), 680, 681, 684 
Accessory pulsatile organs, 329, 619, 649, 708 
Accra, 57 
Acone eyes, 652 
Acquired resistance (to insecticides), 88, 558 
Acrotergite, 432, 435 
Aden Protectorate, 43 
Aedeagus, 458 
AZdes calopus (syn.), 21, 23 
AL;des (genus) Meigen, 9 
amended, 9, lo,21 differential characters of, 24 
fossil species of, 43, 44 
salivary secretion of, 491, 707 
tarsal claws of, 441 
type species of genus, 9, 24 
Aedimorphus (s.g. AZdes), 25 
Atdine mosquitoes, characters of, 24 
Aegypti (Aedes) (L.), 
association with man, 29, 41, 54, 58 
breeding-places, 6,13,28,40,43,54,57,61,62,85 
captures in huts and bush, 28 
conditions favouring, 54 
control measures against, 6, 13, 42, 54, 61, 62, 
63, 84, 269, 387,554 
dissemination, 40, 42, 55 
distribution, 30, 35 
early research on, 6, 8, 11, 13 
environment, effect of, 30 
eradication of, 42 
Finlay’s work on, 12 
forest, occurrence in, 28, 29, 40, 42, 43 
forms of, 28, 29, 42 
genetics, 32, 688 
gynandromorphs of, 33 
habits of, 40,54,57,468,484,494, 501, 502, 504, 
530 
hybrids of, 31 
identification of, 24 
introduction of, 41, 42, 55 
use as laboratory animal, 13 
life history, 54 
mutants and, 35 
natural enemies, 54, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63 
nomenclature, 2 1 
original home, 30, 41 
overwintering, 38, 55 
parasites of, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69 
first recognition of, 6, 9 
related species, 24, 25, 26, 27 
strains, 3 1 
synonyms, list of, 23 
synonymy, 21 
systematics, 8, 24 
transport of, 55 
type species of s.g. Stegomyia, 21, 24 
varieties, 27, 35, 40, 42, 43 
vector 
of dengue, 12,81 
of Dirojilaria, 13, 31, 33, 68, 83 
of virus diseases, 82 
of yellow fever, 6,9,11,12,28,3 1,77,78,79, 80 
Aegypti (Culex) L., 9, 22, 23 
46 72= CH 
INDEX 
Aerosols, 86, 557 
Africanus (ACdes), 25, 79, 80 
Agamodistomum, 67 
Agamomermis, 68 
Aircraft disinfection, 13, 88 
Alary muscles, 316, 329, 334, 615 
Alboannulis (Duttonia), 23, 25 
Albolineatus (Ad;des), 61 
Albopictus (Aedes), 31, 67, 259, 468, 543, 544, 571 
Aldebara Island, 43 
Aldrin, 555 
Alimentary canal 
imago 
general description, 564 
dissection, 121 
divisions (developmental), 565 
ileum and ileo-colon, 576 
labral canal, 565 
mid-gut (ventriculus), 489, 565, 576, 707 
mouth, 568 
oesophageal pump, 565,572, 586 
oesophagus and diverticula, 573 
peritrophic membrane, 707 
proventriculus (cardia), 565, 574 
pyloric ampulla, 576 
rectum and rectal papillae, 577 
salivary glands and ducts, 65, 66, 429, 491, 
564, 565,578 
salivary pump and salivary channel, 564, 570 
references, 597 
larva 
general description, 287 
colon, 296, 705, 706 
dissection, 705 
ileum, 295, 705 
of first instar, 237 
mid-gut and gastric caeca, 294 
mouth, 287 
oesophagus, 292, 309 
pharynx, 54,289, 704 
preoral cavity, 287 
of the prepupa, 245 
proventriculus, 292 
rectum, 296 
salivary glands and ducts, 237, 294, 308 
references, 3 18 
pupa, 370 
Allethrin, 556 
Alula, 444, 446, 450 
Amino acids in larval food, 261 
Ammonia, as attractant, 535 
Amnion and amnion serosa, 178, 183, 184 
Ampulla (pyloric), 295, 576 
Ampulla (of oviduct), 678 
Anabasin, 554 
Anal area and fold (of wing), 446 
Anal segment (or lobe) 
in embryo, 188 
of instars, 237, 241 
of larva IV, 196, 209, 298 larval musculature, 314, 317 
of the imago, 459,465 
Anal papillae 
description, 196, 209, 237 
in embryo, 188 
function of, 209, 710 
growth measurements, 28 1 
effect of salinity, 268, 710 
Angle of contact, 126 
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, 78 
Annularis (Anopheles), 49 1 
Anopheles 
first description of larva, 6 
early references to structure, 8 
flight tone, 521 
larval overwintering, 55 
remigium (of wing), 518 
salivary glands and secretion, 49 1, 492 
Antenna 
in embryo, 185 
growth measurements of, 280 
at hatching, 165 
of imaginal buds of, 244 
of the imago, 420,422, 535, 658 
of the instars, 233, 234 
of larva IV, 26, 194,203 
of the male, 8, 24, 423, 535 
in the prepupa, 244 
in the pupa, 356 
Antenna1 lobe (of brain), 629, 632 
Antenna1 muscles, 203, 306, 309, 584, 586 
Antenna1 nerve, 322, 323, 629, 638, 642, 660 
Antenna1 nerve-centres and tracts, 629,632,633,634 
Antenna1 prominence, 19 1, 198 
Antenna1 pulsatile organ, 619, 648 
Antenna1 sense organs, 326, 535, 663 
Antenna1 special sense organ (Johnston’s organ), 
8, 535, 658 
Antennifer, 422 
Anterior hard palate, 571 
Anterior mesenteron rudiment, 186, 189 
Anterior pronotal lobes (and chaetae), 25,432,434 
‘Anthisan’ cream, 496 
Anti-A@des aegypti campaigns, 42, 84 
Antiformicas, 57 
Antlia (sucking pump), 572 
Ants, 62, 63 
Anus, 189, 196, 298, 565, 577 
Aorta, 290, 325, 329, 331, 614, 616, 618 
anterior termination of, 332, 618 
prothoracic aortic sinus, 332, 618 
Apodeme of the side-piece (gonocoxite), 460 
Apparatus 
attachment for feeding on rabbit, 107 
bubbling air apparatus, 101 
cages, 101 
for rearing and collecting larvae, 101 
killing chamber, 107 
mosquito aspirator pipette, 106 
Aquatic birds as virus reservoirs, 62 
722 
Arabia, 35, 43 
Argenteus (C&x) Poiret, 21, 23 
Arizona, 36, 37 
Arthus’s phenomenon, 495 
Asthenobiosis, 175 
Atritarsis var., 27, 42 
Atrium (of spiracle), 221, 605 
Atrium (of female terminalia), 346, 351, 464, 674, 
678 
Atroparvus (Anopheles), 476 
Attitude 
of imago at rest, 405 
when feeding, 484 
in flight, 527 
of the larva, 253 
of the pupa, 383 
position of human body in relation to biting, 541 
Attractants, chemical, 476 
Attraction 
by clothing, 540 
by moisture, 539 
by smell, 476, 533 
by sound, 535 
by visual stimulus, 56, 530, 541 
by warm convection currents, 476, 536, 538,540, 
541 
by warmth, 476, 536, 542 
Australasia, 24 
Australia, 9, 12,23,27, 28, 30, 35, 38, 39,42, 60, 65 
Axillary cord (of wing), 446, 450, 452 
Axillary sclerites, 451, 5 18, 519 
Azores, 36, 37 
Baboons, as virus reservoirs, 79 
Bacteria 
affecting larva, 64 
as larval food, 260 
Bahia Blanca, 37 
Bahrein Island, 43 
Bamboo stumps, 58, 61 
Banana Island, 58 
Bancrofti (Culex), 23, 27, 42 
Barbirostris (Anopheles), 262 
Basal lobe (of gonocoxite), 26, 459 
Basal sclerites (pterales), 451, 518 
Bats, 63 
Bechuanaland, 38 
Behaviour 
of imago 
at the blood meal, 484 
choice of breeding place, 58 
at copulation, 4, 494, 502, 503 
diurnal activity, 56, 472 
domestic habits, 40, 54 
feeding, 28, 56, 406, 468, 484, 530, 707 
of gynandromorphs, 33 
of males, 34, 484, 494 
at oviposition, 133, 504, 543 
selection of food, 468 
see also Attraction, special senses INDEX 
of the larva 
attitude, 253 
clinging to receptacles, 259 
electric current, reaction to, 271 
methods of feeding, 256, 260, 289 
light, reaction to, 257 
mechanical stimuli, reaction to, 258 
movements, 255 
spiracular parts, use of, 253 
submersion, resistance to, 259 
temperature gradient and, 258 
of the pupa, 385 
Benzene hexachloride (incement tablets), 85,86,271 
Bermudas, 36, 37 
Bhatia’s medium, 116 
Bifurcatus (Anopheles), 66, 262, 263 
Birds 
as natural enemies, 63 
and encephalitis, 82 
and West Nile virus, 82 
and yellow fever, 80 
Bites (Aedes aegypti) 
immunity to, 495 
reactions to, 83, 494 
treatment of, 6, 496 
Biting-rate, 479 
Black Sea Coast, 39, 56 
Blastoderm, 178, 182 
Bleaching, 114, 151 
Blood 
as attractant, 533, 534 
males sucking, 34 
necessary for oviposition, 468 
preserved blood, feeding with, 112 
sources of as food, 468 
Blood (haemolymph), see under Haemolymph 
Blood meal 
description of, 484 
amount of blood taken, 492 
digestion of, 493, 707 
fertilisation and, 506 
the gorged insect, 406, 485, 488 
behaviour of males during, 484, 494 
number taken during life period, 472 
and ovarian development, 54, 468, 506 
time from emergence to, 471 
time of day taken, 56,472, 530 
Body measurements 
of imago, 406 
of instars, 25 1, 278 
of larva IV, 115, 251 
of pupa, 382 
Bombay, 41, 63 
Bonny, 43 
Borax (as larvicide), 270 
Bosnia, 37 
Boston, 37 
Brain 
in embryo, 178, 191 
of imago, 626-35 
723 46-2 
INDEX 
Brain (cont.) 
in insects, 627 
in first instar larva, 238 
of larva IV, 320-4 
of the pupa, 377 
Brain (structure) 
antenna1 lobes, 629, 632 
association neurone cells, 629 
central body, 630, 634 
cerebral commissure, 629 
cerebral crura, 627 
cerebral lobes, 630 
corpora pedunculata, 322, 379, 630, 632, 634, 
635 Cages, 101 
Calcutta, 61 
California, 36 
corpus ventrale, 632 
cortical layer of cerebral lobes, 629, 632 
deutocerebrum, 192, 238, 322, 378, 627, 629 
homologies of cerebral structure, 634 
neuropile masses of cerebral lobes, 633 
neuropile tracts of cerebral lobes, 634 
pars intercerebral& 630, 632, 693 
pons cerebralis, 630 
protocerebrum, 192, 238, 322, 627 
sub-oesophageal ganglion, 320, 635 
tritocerebrum, 192, 322, 627 
references, 645 
see aZs0 Optic lobes 
Brazil 
absence in forests of, 40, 42 
eradication from, 42 
feeding habits in, 56 
not original home, 41 
yellow fever in, 12, 40, 42, 78 
Breeding (A&es aegypti) 
in alkaline water, 59 
in brackish water, 59, 268 
for culture, 100, 108, 110, 111 
pH and, 59,269 
Breeding-places (AL;des aegypti) 
description of, 28, 40, 43, 54, 57, 61, 62, 85 
control of, 6, 13, 62, 85 
water of, 54, 58, 268 
references, 70 
Brest, 36 
British Columbia, 36, 37, 60 
British Solomon Islands, 41 
British Somaliland, 28, 43 
Bromeliaceous plants, 59, 61 
Bubbling air, apparatus for, 101 
Buccal cavity Calopus (Aedes), 21, 23 
Calopus (Culex), 23 
Campaigns, anti-AL;des aegypti, 42, 84 
Camphor (as larvicide), 271 
Canada, 68 
Canary Islands, 23, 36, 37 
Cannibal mosquito larvae, 54, 61 
Cape Province, 38 
Capitellum (of haltere), 452, 453 
Carbolic acid (as fumigant), 555 
Carbon dioxide 
as attractant, 534 
as excitant, 476, 534, 535 
effect on larva, 270 
Cardia, 292, 294, 565, 573 
Cardo, 421 
Carmine (feeding larvae on), 704, 705, 707 
Caspian area, 23 
Caspius (Ochlerotatus) Pallas, 22, 23 
Caudal hairs, 197 
Celebes, 23 
Central America, 9, 25, 42, 60 
Central body (brain), 630, 634 
Cephalic amnion, 184 
Cephalic lobes (embryo), 178, 191 
Cephalic neuro-endocrine system, 342 
Cephalic pouch, 184 
Cephalothorax, 355, 360 
Cerci, 464, 465 
Cerebral lobes, see under Brain 
Cervical collar, 197, 310 
Cervical commisural trachea, 304 
Cervical sclerite, 43 1 
Cess-pits (breeding in), 58 
Ceylon, 41 
Chad, Lake, 55 
Chaetae (lists of) 
imaginal thorax, 438 
larval head (Table 9), 211 
larval terminal segments (Table lo), 217 
pupa (Table 21), 365 
Chaetotaxy 
of the imago, 423, 565,571 
of the larva, 288 
muscles of, 585 
sense organs of, 571, 664 
Buenos Aires, 37, 38 
Burma, 24, 35, 68 of imago, 404,425,432,435,438 
of larval abdomen, 216, 236, 240 
of larval head, 211 
of larval instars, 236, 240 
of larval thorax, 212, 236 
of pupal abdomen, 364, 365, 366 
of pupal cephalothorax, 366 
Chagos Island, 38 
Chaoborus (natural enemy), 61 
Chaoborus (heart observations), 329 
Chemical attractants, 476 
Chemicals, effect of 
on the egg (eclosion), 151, 168 Caeca (gastric) 8, 237, 287, 294, 565,705, 707 
Caecus (female accessory gland), 346, 351, 464, on the imago, 554 
465, 674, 679, 680 on the larva, 268,271 
724 
Chemicals (cont.) 
on the pupa, 271,387 
see &so Insecticides, Larvicides, Repellents 
Chiasma (optic), 322, 629 
Chiasmata (chromosome), 69 1 
Chile, 37 
China, 11, 37, 39, 60, 63, 65 
Chironomus, 61, 342, 343, 346, 348, 458, 600 
Chloramine red (for marking), 517 
Chlordane, 555 
Chloride regulation (haemolymph), 709 
Chlorinated compounds, 84, 87, 554, 555, 557 
Chordotonal organs 
description, 326 
of halteres, 453, 663 
in newly ecdysed larva, 233 
of respiratory siphon, 223 
Chorion, 134, 135, 153 
Chorionic bodies, 7, 133, 153 
Chorionic pad, 133, 134 
Christmas Island, 38 
Chromosomes, 689 
Cibarium, 57 1 
Ciliates, 67 
Cimex, 465 
Cinereus (Ad;des), 9, 24, 429 
Cingulum, 292, 309 
Circulatory system 
description, 329, 379, 614 
accessory pulsatile structures, 329, 619, 649 
alary muscles, 316, 329, 334, 615 
aorta, 290, 325, 329, 331, 614,616, 618 
associated tissues, 335, 337, 620 
circulation of haemolymph, 708 
dorsal nephrocytes, 8, 329, 335, 615 
haemocytes, 337, 620 
heart (dorsal vessel), 329, 614, 708 
heart beat, 70 
oenocytes, 8, 337, 379, 620, 700 
osmotic regulation of haemolymph, 709 
pericardial cells, 8, 335, 615 
prothoracic aortic sinus, 332, 618 
tracheal plexus, 33 1 
ventral nephrocytes, 336, 620 
references, 625, 7 15 
Circum-oesophageal connectives, 322, 627 
Cisterns, breeding in, 57 
Citronella, oil of, 478, 559, 560 
Civilisation, effects of, 42, 54 
Claspers, see Gonocoxites 
Classification, characters used in, 8, 10, 24 
Claviger (Anopheles), 262, 263, 492 
Claws, tarsal, 8, 24, 440, 441 
Cleavage, 178, 179 
Clements’s organ, 618, 619, 648 
Climate, effect of, 40, 55 
Clypeus 
imago 
description, 420, 423 
homologies of, 424, 565 INDEX 
muscles of, 584 
relations of, 424, 571 
scaling of, 25 
larva, 198, 202, 203, 306 
pupa, 359 
Coastal conditions, 40, 41 
Coconut trees, breeding in, 58 
Cocos Islands, 38 
Coelomomyces, 64 
Coleoptera, predaceous, 60 
Colocasia, breeding in, 58 
Colombia, 82 
Colon, 296, 705, 706 
Colorado, 36 
Colour 
changes of in pupa, 384 
coloured lights, reaction to, 532 
imaginal response to, 532 
Comb teeth (or spines), 26, 196, 209, 241 
Common oviduct, 346, 351, 674, 678, 679 
Common salivary duct, 294, 565, 570, 580, 581 
Communis (Acdes), 21, 68, 256, 458 
Comoro Island, 38 
Compound eyes 
description, 200, 242, 322, 326, 356, 420, 421, 
424, 530, 652 
facets of, 653, 654, 656 
the ommatia, 652 
types of, 653 
Conditioning of eggs, 112, 147, 150, 171 
Congo, 58 
Conoid, 45 1 
Control 
aerosols, use of, 86, 557 
aircraft disinfection, 13, 88 
in America, 42 
anti-Ai;des aegypti campaigns, 42, 84 
of breeding places, 6, 13, 62, 85 
use of cannibal larvae, 54, 61 
classical methods of, 85 
early work on, 13, 84 
fumigants, 87, 555, 556 
gases and vapours, 85, 270, 388 
insecticides, 13, 84, 85-9, 554 
larvicides, 86, 269, 270, 387 
larvivorous fish, 6, 13, 54, 62, 86 
use of natural enemies, 61, 62, 63, 85, 86 
piped water supply, 55, 85 
residual spraying, 87, 555, 557, 558 
in shipping, 85 
traps, use of, 58, 87 
in urban areas, 84 
references, 96 
see also Protection 
Convection currents, 476, 536, 538, 540, 541, 542 
Cook Island, 88 
Copulation, 4, 494, 502 
Coracoid, 45 1 
Corethra, 61, 328 
Cornea, cornea1 lens, 652 
725 
INDEX 
Coronal suture, 420 Demerara, 27 
Corpora allata. 325.341,342,379,643,645,693,695 Dendritic tuft (float hair), 361 
Corpora cardiaca, 342, 645, 693, 694 Dendrophilus (Ak;des), 26 
Corpora optica, 632 Dengue, 12, 61, 64, 81 
Corpora paracardiaca, 645 Desert conditions, 40 
Corpora pedunculata, 322, 379, 630, 632, 634, 635 Desiccation, resistance to 
Corpora ventrale, 632 
Corpse, feeding on, 469 
Corpus centrale, 630, 634 
Corsica, 62 
Cortisone acetate (for bites), 496 
Costa, 444, 446, 447, 448, 449 
Costo-radial region (of wing), 449 
Country boats, breeding in, 57 
Cowl, 464, 680 
Coxae, 436,440, 593, 664 
Coxite, see Gonocoxite 
Crab-holes, breeding in, 58 
Cratal hairs, 197 
Cresols, as larvicides, 270 
Crithidia, 66 
Cross-veins, 446 
Cuba, 2, 12, 23, 55, 62, 67 
Cuban strain, 31 
Cubitus, 447 
Culex by the egg, 144, 147 
by the pupa, 385 
Detritus (Aedes), 34 
Deutocerebrum, 192, 238, 322, 378, 627, 629 
Dhows, breeding in, 28, 40 
Diapause (in egg), 170, 174 
Dibutyl phthalate, 478 
Dieldrin, 555, 558 
Digestion 
adaptation of eye to light, 653 
capacity of oesophageal pump, 573 
chloride regulation of larva, 710 
flight tone of, 521 
mandible of male, 429 
proportion of sexes, 500 
salivary glands and secretion, 491 
siphon tag, 328 
tarsal claws, 441 
Culicifacies (Anopheles), 262 
Culicifuges, 556 
Culicoides, 62, 68 
Culture medium (for hatching), 166 
Culture medium (for rearing), 108, 262 
Cupola (of haltere), 453 
Cuticle 
of the imago, 700 
of the larva, 700 
of the pupa, 384, 700 
physiology of, 698 
Cytoplasmic inheritance, 32, 688 
Dakar, 58 
Dakar strain, 31 
Dalhousie (altitude), 40 
Dar-es-Salam, 58 
DDD, 556 
DDT 
acquired resistance to, 558 
action of, 558 
use in control, 84, 86, 556 
description, 555 
use as larvicide, 86, 270 
in residual spraying, 557 in the imago, 493, 707 
in the larva, 704 
Dimethyl phthalate, 477, 559 
Dirofilaria, 13, 31, 33, 68, 83 
Dispersal studies (marking for), 516 
Dissection, 121, 705 
Dissemination, conditions affecting, 40, 41,42, 55 
Distribution 
altitude, effect of, 35, 39 
association with man, 41 
civilisation and, 42, 54 
climate and, 40, 55 
conditions favouring, 40, 41 
desert and, 40 
general features of, 35 
of s.sp. formosus, 23, 29, 30, 35, 40, 42, 43 
history of, 44 
in the New World, 41, 43 
northern limits of (with list of countries), 36 
physical features and, 40 
of var. queenslandensis, 27, 35, 42 
rainfall and, 40 
southern limits of (with list of countries), 37 
summer period, effect of, 56 
temperature and, 36, 38 
of type form, 28, 29, 35, 42 
Diverticula, 489, 564, 573 
Domestic receptacles, breeding in, 57 
Dorsal closure, 184, 188 
Dorsal fringes (of pharynx), 290 
Dorsal nephrocytes (pericardial cells), 8, 329,335, 
615 
Dorsal ocelli, 420, 424, 530, 619, 638, 642, 648 
Dorsal vessel (heart and aorta), 290, 325, 329-34, 
379, 614-19, 708, 709 
Dorsalis (Aedes), 22 
Drawings, technique for, 125 
Drosophila (mutants), 34 
Ductus ejaculatorius, 347, 680, 681, 684 
Durban, 42, 43 
Dwellings, breeding in and in vicinity of, 57 
Dyar’s rule, 276 
Earthenware pots (for oviposition), 101 
East Africa, 30, 43 
726 
INDEX 
Ecdysial fluid, 23 1, 249 
Ecdysial lines, 231 
Ecdysis, 227, 231 
Eclosion 
description of act, 158 
conditions affecting, 165 
action of the egg-breaker, 160 
swallowing of fluid by embryo, 163 
incubation period and hatching time, 170, 171 
mechanism of hatching, 159 
hatching response of normal eggs, 174 
hatching response of residual eggs, 174 
hatching of the dead larva by chemicals, 173 
references, 175 
Egg, the 
of A&des aegypti 7, 131, 158, 701 
general description, 13 1 
of Anopheles, 7, 131, 133 
changes in volume, sp. gr. and weight, 143 
chemicals, effect of, 151, 153 
chorionic bodies, 7, 133, 153 
chorionic pad, functions of, 134 
colour changes, 143, 154 
of Culex, 7, 132 
desiccation, 144, 147 
diapause (as primary larva), 170, 174 
the embryo, 146 
endochorion, 137, 154 
exochorion, 135, 153 
eye-spots and egg-breaker, 146 
measurements, 138 
membranes of, 135, 153 
orientation, 133 
oxygen requirements of, 155 
physical characters, 138 
physiology of, 153 
polygonal markings of, 132, 137 
respiration of, 701 
temperature and viability, 150 
waterproofing of, 154 
Eggs 
abnormal eggs, 145 
of At;dine mosquitoes, 24 
arrangement of, 133 
bleaching of, 114, 125, 151 
conditioning of, 112, 147, 148, 150, 171 
error in traps caused by, 58 
exploded or ruptured eggs, 138, 145 
fixing of, 125 
lethal temperature to, 150 
manipulation of, 112 
mounting of, 114 
natural enemies of, 60, 63 
overwintering of, 39, 55 
residual or resistant eggs, 172, 174 
reswollen eggs, 145, 173 
retained eggs, 5 12 
sectioning, 125 
sites where oviposited, 133, 504, 543 
sterilising of viable eggs, 151 sunken eggs, 134 
unfertilised eggs, 145 
Egg-breaker, 146, 159-63, 191, 193, 227, 233 
Egg-cap, 159-63 
Egg-follicle, see Ovarian follicle 
Egg-rafts (attacked by snails), 60 
Egg-shell, 134, 142, 676 
Egypt, 9, 23, 43 
Ejaculatory ducts, 347, 348, 680, 681, 684 
Electric current, effect on larvae, 271 
Elutus (Anopheles), 538 
Embryo 
anal segment, 188 
antenna1 rudiment, 185 
brain, 178, 191 
egg-breaker, 146, 159-63, 191, 193 
epipharynx, 190 
feeding brush rudiments, 191 
frontal ganglion, 190 
labral groove and pouch, 184 
mouth-parts rudiments, 188, 190 
ocelli, 192 
palatum, 191 
proctodaeum, 178, 189 
segmentation, 146, 188 
stomodaeum, 178,185 
ventral nerve cord, 190, 192 
Embryonic development 
general account, 177 
amnion and serosa, 183 
anterior mesenteron rudiment, 186, 189 
blastoderm, formation of, 178, 182 
cleavage, 179 
caudal, lateral and cephalic amnion, 178, 184 
dorsal closure, 184, 188 
germ band, formation of, 178, 183 
mesoderm, 190 
neural groove, 190 
organogeny, 179, 190 
pre-cephalic element, 185 
pro-cephalic lobes, 185 
proctodaeal invagination, 189 
stomodaeal invagination, 185 
summary of development stages, 178 
references : embryology, 193 
Emergence 
the act of, 389 
mechanism of, 393 
Empis, 1, 3 
Empodium, 442 
Empusa, 64 
Encephalitis, 82 
Endocrine glands, 342 
Engineering dumps, breeding in, 57 
England, 36, 38, 63, 65, 67 
Engorgement, 484, 485, 488, 489 
Enzootic hepatitis, 82 
Enzymes, effect in hatching, 168 
Epaulet, 451, 519 
Epicranial plates and suture, 197, 198,420,424,425 
727 
Epidemics 
of dengue, 12, 81 
of yellow fever, 12, 77, 78, 79 
Epipharynx, 190, 202,429 
Equine encephalitis, 82 
Eradication (of A&&s aegypti), 42 
Eritrea, 40, 43 
Ethiopian region, 41, 44 
Excretion, mechanism of, 670 
Excretory system 
of the imago, 667 
of the larva, 343 
Malpighian tubules, 8, 65, 298, 343, 564, 565, 
667 
nephrocytes, 8, 329, 335, 336, 615, 620, 671 
Pantel’s cells, 671 
Eyes 
compound, 200,242,322,326,356,420,421,424, 
530,652 
facets of, 653 
ommatidia, 652 
types of, 653 
see also Ocelli 
Faeces 
of imago, 493, 509 
of larva, 64, 706 
Falciform apodeme, 198 
Fasciata (Stegomyia), 10, 21, 23 
Fasciatus (Culex), 21, 23 
Fascicle, 426, 430, 431, 485, 486, 487, 488, 534 
Fat-body, 8, 238, 329, 338, 340, 345, 620 
Fatigans (CuZex), 32, 34, 64, 65, 66, 68, 258, 270, 
472,492, 500, 580, 680 
Faunas, history of, 44 
Feeding 
the blood meal 
amount of blood taken, 492 
biting rate, 479 
capillary and pool feeding, 488 
description of act of feeding, 484 
digestion of the blood meal, 493, 707 
functions of the diverticula, 489 
the gorged insect, 406,485, 488 
males, behaviour at blood feed, 494 
mechanism of feeding, 486 
reaction following bites, 6, 83, 494 
salivary gland secretion, 491, 707 ’ 
time from emergence to first feed, 471 
conditions affecting 
fertilisation, 475 
humidity, 475 
moisture of the skin, 476 
temperature, 474 
warmth of skin, 469, 476, 537 
the imago : general 
artificial feeding, 486, 543 
in dark huts, 56,473 
in the forest, 28 
forms of feeding, 470 INDEX 
gynandromorphs and, 34 
on the human corpse, 469 
human host, selection of, 469 
males sucking sweat, 34,494 
through membrane, 470 
by night, 56 
on open drop, 470 
on cold-blooded vertebrates, 469 
larva 
description of, 256 
food requirements, 256, 260 
mechanism of larval feeding, 203, 256, 289 
stimuli to 
moisture, 476, 537, 539 
radiant heat, 542 
smell, 476, 533, 537 
sound, 536 
visual stimuli, 56, 530, 541 
warm convection currents, 476,536, 537, 538, 
539, 540, 541, 542 
warm object, 476, 536 
Feeding-brushes, see under Flabella 
Female dominance (cytoplasmic transmission), 32 
Female pronucleus, 677 
Female reproductive system, see reproductive 
system (female) 
Female terminalia, 346, 351, 464, 664, 679 
Femora, 26,400,440 
Fernando PO, 26 
Fertilisation 
of the female, 475, 503, 506 
of the egg, 178, 512 
FicaZbia (subgenus), 441 
Fiji, 38, 61 
Filariasis, 11, 12, 68, 83 
Filtration of water (by larvae), 704 
Finlaya (subgenus), 25, 65 
Fish, larvivorous, 6, 13, 54, 61, 86 
Fish-hook apodeme, 289 
Flabella (feeding-brushes) 
description, 200, 203, 256 
early reference to, 8 
in embryo, 191 
function of, 289 
gliding by use of, 256 
muscles of, 192, 205, 306, 309 
Flabellar apodeme and plaque, 200, 203, 204 
Flagellate parasites, 66 
Flagellum (of antenna), 422, 659 
Flange (of buccal cavity), 571, 572 
Flange (of scutum), 452 
Flight 
attitude in, 527 
flight tone, 520 
the halteres in flight, 520 
of males, 494, 515 
mathematics of, 524 
mechanism of, 517 
range of, 516 
reserves in, 697 
728 
INDEX 
Flight (cont.) 
speed of, 515 
stroboscopic observation of, 5 17, 523, 527 
oscillographic observation of, 524 
up and down movements of wings, 518 
wing rotation, 518 
wing-stroke frequency, 520 
Flit, 555 
Float hair (of pupa), 361 
Folic acid, 261 
Follicle (ovarian), see Ovarian follicle 
Food requirements 
of the imago, 468 
of the larva, 108, 256, 260 
Forcipes, see Gonocoxites 
Forest, occurrence of Ai;des aegypti in, 28, 29, 40, 
42,43 
Forest yellow fever, 40, 78, 79, 80 
Formosus (s.sp.), 23, 29, 35, 40, 42, 43 
Fossil mosquitoes, 43 
Fowl pox, 82 
France, 37, 65 
French Commission, 12 
French Sudan, 55 
French West Africa, 65 
Freon, 556 
Fringes (of pharynx), 54, 289,704 
Frons, 198, 424, 648 
Frontal ganglion, 190, 290, 309, 323,371,379,572, 
629, 643 
Frontal nerve, 639 
Fronto-clypeus, 198,420,424 
Fronto-labral nerve, 634, 635, 639, 642 
Fulcra1 plates (of clypeus), 424 
Fulvithorax (AL;des), 255 
Fumigants, 87, 555, 556 
Funestus (Anopheles), 65, 262, 550 
Fungi, parasitic, 64 
Furcae (thoracic), 437 
Gambia, 79 1 
Gambiae (Anopheles), 64, 67, 262, 550 
Gammexane, 87, 555, 557 
Ganglionic plate, 629 
Gastric caeca, 8, 237, 287, 294, 565, 576, 705, 707 
Gastric ganglion, 342 
Gater’s medium, 116 
Genal area, 191, 425, 430 
Genetics, 31, 32, 33, 688 
Geniculatus (ACdes) (gregarines), 65 
Genital buds, see Imaginal buds 
Genital cavity (penis sac), 347, 458 
Genital opening (female), 679 
Genitalic characters, 8, 26, see also Terminalia 
Georgia (U.S.A.), 23 
Geographical distribution, see Distribution 
Germ band, germ cells, 178, 183 
Germany, 65 
Germarium, 674 
Gold Coast, 28, 57, 60 Gold powder, for marking mosquitoes, 517 
Golgi vesicles, 677 
Gonapophyses, 680 
Gonocoxites (coxites, side-pieces, claspers), 26,347, 
348, 362,457,459,460 
Gough Island, 37 
Gregarines, 65 
Growth 
general account, 276 
conditions affecting, 276 
the growth curve, 285 
growth hormone, 693 
measurements of body parts, 280 
measurements in cultures, 282 
measurements at pre- and post-ecdysis, 278 
weight at pre- and post-ecdysis, 281 
references : growth, 286 
Gynandromorphs (with list of recorded species), 33 
Haemagogus (genus), 79 
Haemocytes, 337, 620 
Haemolymph, 329, 337, 702, 709 
Halteres 
description, 432, 436, 452, 520, 662 
functions of, 520 
imaginal buds of, 196,244 
measurements of, 453 
movements of, 454, 524, 527 
muscles of, 590, 592 
nerves of, 636, 642, 663 
sense organs of, 45 3, 660 
Hamuloid process, 452 
Hanoi, 28, 31 
Harbours, association with, 54, 57 
Harpagomyia (genus), 69 
Hatching (from pupa), see Emergence 
Hatching (from egg), see Eclosion 
Head 
at ecdysis, 232 
at eclosion, 159 
formation in embryo, 191 
of the imago, 397 
of instars, 227, 238 
of the larva, 194 
of the pupa, 356 
see also under names of component parts and 
organs 
Head capsule 
of the imago 
description, 418 
antennae, 420, 422, 535, 659 
clypeus, 423 
the frontal area, 420, 424, 648 
hairs of the head, 404, 425 
see also, Compound eyes 
of the larva 
description, 197 
the feeding brushes and apodemes, 8,200,203, 
256, 289, 306, 309 
hairs of the larval head, 211 
729 
INDEX 
Head capsule (cont.) 
of the pupa 
description, 356 
pupal head hairs, 355, 359, 364 
Heart, 329, 379, 614, 708, 709 
Hebredeus (Aedes), 8 1 
Heizmannia (genus), 25 
Himalayas, 39 
Historical testing of, 13 
types of, 554 
Instars 
early writings on the mosquito, 3, 5 
early research on Ad;des aegypti, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13 
early observations on structure, 7, 564 
early systematic work, 8 
first description of the mosquito larva, 7 
first description of the respiratory siphon, 7 
Hong Kong, 60 
Hormones general account of, 227 
cast skins of, 117, 228, 232 
chaetotaxy, 236, 240 
duration of instar periods, 245 
identification of instars, 227 
identification of instar stages, 228 
instar I, 227, 233, 268, 270, 696 
instars II and III, 238 
linear measurement of, 115, 251,278 
see also Ecdysis ; Growth 
Integument, 698 
International rules of zoological nomenclature, 23 
Italy, 23, 37, 63, 65, 66 
in growth and metamorphosis, 692 
in ovarian development, 508, 695 
Humeral plate, 450, 451, 518 
Humidity Japan, 37, 41, 60 
Java, 43 
and biting activity, 475, 539 
and viability, 54, 147, 385, 552 
Hybridisation in mosquitoes, 3 1, 688 
Hydrostatic balance 
of the larva, 253 
of the pupa, 383 
Hypocerebral ganglion, 342, 645 
Hypostomal area, 200 
Hyrcanus (Anopheles), 262, 530, 550 Johnston’s organ, 8, 535, 658 
Jugoslavia, 55, 56 
Jungle, sylvan or forest yellow fever, 12,40, 78, 79, 
80 
Kameroons, 43 
Kenya, 25, 28, 29, 40, 43, 58, 61, 78 
Kerosene, 269, 555 
Khartoum, 40 
Kivuensis (var.), 25 
Labella, 428 
Identification 
of Ad;des aegypti, 24 
of larval instars, 227 
Ileo-colon, 565, 577 
Ileum, 295, 565,576 
Imaginal buds Labial area (of larval head), 200, 202 
Labial chaetae (of proboscis), 425 
Labial nerve, 323, 639 
Labial rudiment, 200, 244 
Labium 
antenna1 and labial, 200, 244 
female terminalia, 346 
legs, wings and halteres, 196, 242, 244, 249, 360 
male terminalia, 347, 348 
mouth-parts, 202, 206, 249, 359 
respiratory trumpets, 196, 244, 304 
Immunity to bites, 495 
Incubation period, 170 
Indalone, 477 
India, 10, 11, 12, 23, 24, 27, 35, 39, 41, 43, 58, 61, 
63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68 
Indiana, 37 of imago, 7,425,426 
of the larva (labial plate), 200, 205, 206, 326 
of the pupa, 359 
Labral area (of larval head), 200 
Labral canal, 565, 568 
Labral groove, 185 
Labral nerve, 323, 629, 639 
Labral pouch, 184 
Labrum 
formation in embryo, 191 
of imago, 7,428,565, 568, 664 
of larva, 203 
of pupa, 359 
Indirect wing muscles, 313,377, 588, 590,591, 597, 
697 
Indo-China, 68 
Indo-Malayan region, 27, 30, 35,41,42,43,67,68 
Insecticides 
acquired resistance to, 88, 558 
choice of, 88 
methods by which used, 556 
mode of action, 557 
synthetic chlorinated compounds, 84,87,554,555, 
556 Lagos, 42,43, 57, 58 
Lagos strain, 31 
Larval instars, see Instars 
Larvicides, 6, 85, 269, 388 
Larvivorous fish, 6, 13, 54, 61, 86 
Lateral ocelli, see Ocelli 
Lateral oviducts, 346, 674, 678 
Leaf axils, breeding in, 58 
Legs 
description, 440 
imaginal buds of, 196, 242, 249, 360 
730 
INDEX 
Legs (cent .) 
measurements of, 408, 410 
muscles of, 590, 593, 596 
ornamentation, 26, 29, 400 
positions held in, 405, 484, 502, 504, 527 
scaling, 400 
sense organs of, 440, 664 
Lethal temperature, see under Temperature 
Lethane, 555 
Life 
duration of, 57, 548 
requirements for, 54, 548 
Life history, 54 
Light 
activation by, 531 
adaptation of eye to, 653 
effect on colour development in egg and pupa, 
143, 385 
effect on biting activity, 475 
intensity, measuring, 126 
reaction of imago to, 530 
reaction of larva to, 257 
Ligula, 428 
Lithium chloride, effect on pupa, 387 
Luciensis (var.), 27 
Ludlowi (Anopheles), 262 
Lutzia (genus) (cannibal larvae), 61 
Macedonia, 37, 63 
Maculipennis (Anopheles), 64, 65, 66, 67, 258, 329, 
345, 453, 518, 530, 531, 533, 534, 602 
Madagascar, 28, 38 
Madras, 65, 66 
Malay Archipelago, 24, 35 
Malaya, 27, 35, 67, 68 
Malayan strain, 31 
Maldive Islands, 38 
Male, the 
antenna, 8, 423, 535 
attitude, 405 
behaviour at blood meal, 484, 494 
behaviour at copulation, 494, 502 
eye facets of, 657, 658 
flight, 494, 515 
flight tone, 521, 522 
food, 468 
palps, 24, 33, 397, 398, 430 
pupal characters, 362, 363 
reproductive organs, 345, 347, 680 
reserves in, 697 
response to wing note, 502 
role in mosquito genetics, 32 
scaling of, 448 
sucking human blood, 34 
sucking sweat, 34, 494 
swarming of, 6, 502 
terminalia, 26, 28, 348, 456 
wing of, 409,410,444,448 
Malpighian tubules, 8, 65, 298, 343, 564, 565, 
667 Mandibles 
early reference to, 7 
of imago, 425,429 
of instar I, 236 
of the larva, 205, 206 
muscles of, 306, 310, 585, 586 
nerves to, 323, 635, 639, 642 
of the pupa, 359 
rudiments of, 188 
Manipulation 
of adults, 119 
of eggs, 112 
of larvae and pupae, 115 
Martinique, 65, 66 
Maryland, 37 
Mascarensis (AL;des), 25, 27 
Mating, 4, 502 
Mating plug, 678 
Mauritius, 38, 43 
Maxillae 
early reference to, 7 
imaginal buds of, 202, 206, 249, 359 
of the imago, 421,425,430,485,486,487, 570 
of instar I, 236 
of the larva, 202, 205, 206 
muscles of, 308, 3 10, 585 
nerves to, 323, 635, 639 
rudiments of, 188 
Maxillary apodeme, 421, 430, 572 
Maxillary palps 
of the imago, 8, 24, 33, 397, 420,430 
of the larva, 202,206, 310, 326 
of the pupa, 359 
Measurements 
of the egg, 138 
of the imago, 120,406 
of instars, 251, 278 
of the larva, 115,251, 279, 280 
of the pupa, 382 
of the wing, 100, 120, 408, 409, 411, 412 
Media vein (of wing), 447 
Medial fold (of wing), 446 
Median fissure (of brain), 629 
Median nerve system, 324, 638 
Mediterranean area, 30, 42, 43 
Medium (for mounting), 116 
Medium (for rearing), 108, 262 
Megarhinus (genus), 61 
Meigenensis (Ak;des), 34 
Meiosis, 691 
Membrane, feeding through, 470 
Mental sclerite, 203, 241 
Meron, 436, 437 
Mesenteron rudiments, 186, 189 
Mesepimeron, 436, 438, 452, 605 
Mesoderm, 190 
Mesodermal strands, 346, 347, 351, 675, 678 
Mesonotum, 434 
Mesothorax, 208, 214, 360,432, 434, 602 
Metallicus (Aedes), 27 
73= 
Metameron, 436, 437 
Metamorphosis 
early references to, 4 
hormones in, 692 
reserves in, 695 
Metathorax, 208, 214, 360, 432, 434, 605 
Methoxychlor, 556 
Methyl benzoate method (sectioning), 122 
Micro-organisms 
effect on hatching, 167 
as larval food, 260 
Micropile, 8, 132 
Microsporidia, 66 
Microtrichae, 442, 659, 699, 701 
Mid-gut, 8, 294, 489, 565, 576, 707 
Mineral oils, 15 1 
Minimus (Anopheles), 262 
Missouri, 37 
Mites, 60, 62, 63, 68 
Mitosis, 690 
Mochlonyx (natural enemy), 61 
Moisture, reaction to, 539 
Molestus (Culex), 32, 34, 35, 177, 258, 325, 510, 
531 
Monkeys (and yellow fever), 79 
Monte Video, 38, 55 
Morocco, 37, 55 
Mortality rate, 548 
Mosquito, var., 27 
Mosquitoes 
bites of, 6, 83, 479, 494 
classification of, 8, 10, 24 
cycle (of malaria), 12 
fossil, 43 
hum of, 3 
marking, 5 16 
names for, 1 
as a natural history object, 5 
origin of the name mosquito, 1 
early references to structure, 7 
early systematic work on, 8 
as vector of disease, 10, 69, 77 
travellers tales of, 6 
early writings on, 3 
Motor neurone cells, 629 
Moulds, 64 
Moulting, see Ecdysis 
Mouse test, 79 
Mouth-parts 
early references to, 7 
in the blood feed, 484,486 
in eclosion, 163 
in the embryo, 188, 190 
at emergence, 249 
of the imago, 421,425,484,486, 534, 663 
of instars, 234, 241 
of the larva, 200, 202, 205 
of the pupa, 359 
Movements 
of the imago, 406 INDEX 
of the larva, 255 
of the pupa, 385 
Mozambique, 25 
Mucus gland (caecus), see Accessory gland 
Multiple complexes (ileum), 692 
Murray Valley encephalitis, 82 
Muscle knots, 3 13 
Muscles 
of the imago 
of the abdomen, 582,596, 615 
of the head, 570,571,572,582,584,642; list of, 
584; notes on, 586 
of the neck, 586, 587 
of spiracles, 590, 592, 597, 604, 605 
of the terminalia, 462 
of the thorax, 582,588 ; list of, 590; notes on, 591 
of the larva 
of the abdomen, 238, 310 
alary muscles, 3 16, 329, 334 
of the eighth and anal segment, 3 14 ; list of, 3 17 
of the head, 306,309; list of, 306; notes on, 309 
of the neck, 310 
of the respiratory siphon, 222 
of the thorax, 3 10 
of the pupa, 374 
type of (protomorphic and neomorphic), 581 
used as reserves, 597, 697 
Muscular fibres, forms of, 376 
Muscular nomenclature, 3 11 
Mutants, 34 
Natal, 43 
Natural enemies 
of the aquatic stages, 13, 54, 59 
cannibal mosquito larvae, 54, 61 
control by, 54, 61, 63, 85, 86 
of the egg, 60, 63 
of the imago, 62 
Neck, 3 10, 431,487, 586,587 
Nematodes, 68 
Nembutal, use of, 111 
Nemoralis (Aedes), 8 
Nemorosus (Agdes), 30, 34, 66, 329 
Neomorphic muscles, 58 1 
Nephrocytes, 8, 329, 335, 336, 615, 620 
Nerves 
imago 
abdominal, 640 
antennal, 629, 642, 660 
fronto-ganglionic connectives, 639 
of the head, 629, 635,638, 642 
to the halteres, 636, 642, 663 
to the legs, 636, 642 
optic lobes or tracts, 627, 629, 633 
peripheral nerves, lists of, 638-43 
thoracic, 639 
larva and pupa 
of the abdomen, 324 
antennal, 322, 323 
of the head, list of, 323 
732 
Nerves (cont.) 
optic lobes or tracts, 238, 242, 322, 378 
ventral sympathetic, 324 
Nervous systems 
retrocerebral complex, 325,329,341,379,643,694 
stomodael or stomatogastric or visceral, 320,323, 
341 
Neural groove, 190 
Neuropile masses, list of, 633 
Neuropile tracts, list of, 634 
Neuro-secretory cells, 693 
New Britain, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 68 
New Caledonia, 38 
New Guinea, 23 
New Hebrides, 38 
New Orleans, 39 
New South Wales, 38 
New World, 41, 42, 43, 61 
New York, 32, 37, 40 
New Zealand, 38 
Newala strain, 31 
Nigeria (Stegomyia), 23 
Nigeria, 23 
Niveus (Cdex), 23 
Nurse cells, 674, 677 
Nymph, use of term, 5 
Ocelli (dorsal), 420, 424, 530, 619, 642, 648 
Ocelli (lateral), 35,146, 192, 322,325,356,422,530, 
648 
Ochlerotatus (subgenus), 21, 22, 23, 30 
Ocular scleri tes, 42 1 
Oenocytes, 8, 337, 379, 620, 700 
Oenocytoids, 337 
Oesophageal diverticula, 489, 565, 573 
Oesophageal nerves, 342 
Oesophageal pump, 565, 572, 586 
Oesophageal valve, 572 
Oesophagus, 189,292, 309, 565,573 
Oil, first used as larvicide, 6 
Oklahoma, 39 
Olfactory stimuli, 476, 533 
Ommatidia (of white-eyed mutant), 35 
Ommatidium (structure), 652 
Optic lobes or tracts, 238,242,322,378,627,629,633 
Oral apodeme, lateral, 188, 289 
Organogeny, 179,190 
Orienting for sectioning, 123 
Original home (of A&Ies aegypti), 41 
Orinoco, 1, 6 
Ornamentation, 25, 26, 27, 29, 398 
Oscillograph, 524 
Ostia, 329, 330, 614 
Ovarian follicle 
description, 674 
development of, 674, 676, 695 
fertilisation of, 5 12 
Ovary 
description (in imago), 512, 674 
in larva and pupa, 346,350 INDEX 
Ovary, development of 
description, 675 
and blood meal, 54, 468, 506 
reserves and, 696 
sugar, effect of, 677 
Overcrowding, 268 
Over-wintering, 39, 55 
Oviducts (common and lateral), 346, 351, 674,678, 
679 
Oviposition 
description of the act of, 504, 509, 512, 543 
blood meal in relation to, 54, 468, 506, 677 
indications of, 509, 543 
light, effect of, 508 
hormones and, 508, 5 11, 695 
mating, stimulation from, 503 
number of eggs laid, 5 10 
number of ovipositions in life-time, 509 
position eggs laid, 505 
retained eggs, 5 12 
salinity and, 505, 544 
selection of site, 133, 504, 544 
stimuli connected with, 503, 511, 543, 677, 695 
temperature and, 39, 55, 507, 544 
time from blood meal to, 507 
time of day of, 39, 508, 543 
by unfertilised females, 511 
water, necessity of, 133, 543 
Oxygen, reduced, effect on eclosion, 169 
Oxygen, requirements for respiration, 155, 701 
Palatum, 191, 200 
Palps, maxillary 
of the female, 379, 420, 430 
of the larva, 202, 206, 3 10, 326 
of the male, 8, 24, 33, 397, 398, 420, 430 
of the pupa, 359 
Panama, 60 
Pantel’s cells, 671 
Parasites (of AL;des aegypti) 
of the egg, 64, 66 
of the imago and larva, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69 
Parasites (of mosquitoes), 63-9 
bacteria, rickettsia and yeasts, 64 
ciliates, 67 
Coelomomyces, 64 
flagellates, 66 
gregarines, 65 
microsporidia, 66 
mites, 60, 62, 63, 68 
moulds and fungi, 64 
nematodes, 68 
spirochaetes, 65 
trematodes, 67 
Paratergite, 435, 588, 592 
Parathion (insecticide), 556 
Paris green, 270 
Pars intercerebralis, 630, 632, 693 
Pecten spines (or teeth), 26, 196, 241 
Pedicel (of antenna), 422, 584, 659 
733 
INDEX 
Pedicel (of haltere), 452 
Penis, penis cavity, penis sac, 347, 457, 681, 684 
Pentad hairs, 241 
Pericardial cells (dorsal nephrocytes), 8,329,335,615 
Pericardial sinus, 615 
Peripheral nerves, list of, 638 
Perispiracular lobes, 196, 220 
Peritreme sclerite (of spiracle), 602 
Peritrophic membrane, 64, 293, 296, 565, 705, 707 
Persian Gulf, 43 
Persistans (var.), 27 
Peru, 37 
Peterfi method (methyl benzoate), 122 
pH (and breeding), 59, 269 
pH of larval mid-gut, 707 
Pharynx 
fringes of, 54, 289, 704 
of the imago, 565 
of the larva, 54, 289, 704 
muscles of, 290, 292, 306, 308, 309 
of the pupa, 371 
Philadelphia, 37, 40, 77 
Philippine Islands, 23 
Phototaxis, 258, 531 
Phragmas (thoracic), 432,434,435 
Physical characters 
of the egg, 138-44 
of the imago, 406-16 
of the instars, 278-86 
of the larva, 115, 251-5 
of the pupa, 382-3 
Pigmentation 
of egg-shell, 143, 154 
of larval head, 227, 228, 699 
of pupal cuticle, 384 
and rainfall, 30 
Pipiens (Culex) 
feeding brushes of, 204 
Malpighian tubules, 668 
ocelli, 325, 422 
retrocerebral complex, 341 
Pipiens berbericus (Culex), 698 
Pipiens paZZens (eye structure), 530 
Pitcairn Island, 38 
Plants (as natural enemies), 59 
Pleurae (abdominal), 456, 485, 488, 701 
Pleurae (thoracic), 432, 435, 452, 605 
Pleural hairs (of larva), 26, 214, 240 
Pleural membrane, 485, 488, 597, 701 
Pleural wing attachment, 451, 452 
Plumbeus (Anopheles), 55, 292, 492 
Polarised light, use of, 3 10 
Polygonal markings (of egg), 132, 137 
Pons cerebralis, 630 
Port Sudan, 28 
Portugal, 23, 37 
Posterior wing root, 435, 449 
Postgenae, 421, 424 
Postgenital plate, 464, 465 
Postnotum, 434, 435, 519 Postspiracular glands, 222 
Potassium salts, regulation of, 710 
Prealar knob, 435, 452 
Precephalic element, 185 
Preclypeus, 191, 198, 203,424 
Precratal hairs, 197 
Predators, see Natural enemies 
Pre-gravid rate, 697 
Prepupa, 242 
Preserved blood, use of, 112 
Principe Island, 43 
Proboscis 
banding of, 26 
in act of feeding, 485 
measurements, 409, 43 1 
structure, 420, 425, 565, 566 
Pronotum (pronotal parts), 25, 432, 438 
Protection, measures of, 89, 90, 477 
Prothoracic aortic sinus, 332, 618 
Prothoracic gland, 643, 693 
Prothorax 
furcae of, 434 
of the imago, 432 
of the larva, 208, 214 
of the pupa, 360 
Protocerebrum, 192, 238, 322, 627 
Proventriculus, 189, 292, 565, 576 
Pseudoafricanus (Aedes), 25 
Pseudotaeniatus (Ai;des), 453 
Psorophora (genus), 61, 64, 65, 69 
Psychrometer tables, 554 
Pulcherrimus (AnopheZes), 263 
Pulsatile organs, accessory, 329, 619, 648, 708 
Pulvilli, 24, 441, 442 
Puncta (spiracular), 298 
Punctulatus (Anopheles), 
Punjab, 55 
Pupa 60 
description, 355 
abdomen, 355,361 
alimentary canal, 370 
cephalothorax, 355, 360 
chaetotaxy, 355, 364 
circulatory system, 379 
head and mouth-parts, 356 
historical, 4, 5 
muscles of, 374 
nervous system, 377 
oenocytes, 379 
paddle, 362 
physical characters, 382 
pupa cuticle, 384, 700 
pupal skins, 363 
respiratory trumpets, 26,196,244,304,360,383,388 
sex identification, 362, 363 
terminalia, 362, 364 
tracheae, list of, 369 
tracheal system, 367 
ventral air space, 361 
ventral nerve chain, 379 
734 
INDEX 
Pupal period, duration of, 388 
Pupation, 247 
Pyloric ampulla, 295, 565, 576, 577 
Pyloric spines, 564, 577, 706 
Pyrethrins, 554, 555, 556, 557 
Pyrethrum, 86, 271, 387, 554 
Quadrimaculatus (Anopheles), 66, 336,532,534,615 
Queensland, 27, 28, 39, 42, 43 
Queenslandensis (var.), 22, 23, 2’7, 28, 29, 30, 35, 
42,43 
Quinquefasciatus (Culex), 32 effect on egg, 151 
haemolymph and, 709 
oviposition and, 505, 544 
effect on pupa, 387 
Salivary channel, 570 
Salivary chromosomes, 692 
Salivary ducts, 294, 308, 429, 565, 580 
Salivary glands, 65, 66, 237,294,491, 564, 565,578 
Salivary muscles, 308, 310, 570, 571, 572, 585 
Salivary pump, 372, 429, 564, 565, 570, 585 
Salivary secretion, 491, 707 
Samoa, 38,41 
Rajputana, 55 
Rearing, technique for, 108, 110, 262 
Rectal papillae, 565, 578 
Rectum, 296, 565,577 
Red Sea Coast, 28 
Reduced oxygen, effect on hatching, 169 
Remigium, 450, 518, 664 
Repellents, 13, 89, 476, 559 
Reproductive system 
of the female, 345,350, 671 
of the male, 345, 347, 680 
Reserves, 695 
Residual spraying, 84, 87, 555, 557 
Respiration, 70 1 
Respiratory siphon 
description, 196, 218 
chordotonal organs of, 223, 328 
first reference to, 7 
growth measurements, 279, 281 
of instars, 236, 241 
muscles of, 222 
postspiracular glands, 222 
segmental homology, 223 
sensory papillae, 326 
siphonic index, 196 
stigma1 plate, 220, 253 
surface tension, action of, 253 
Respiratory trumpets (of pupa) 
description, 26, 360 
imaginal buds of, 196, 244, 304 
surface tension, effect of, 383, 388 
Retrocerebral complex, 325, 329,341, 379,643,694 
Richiardii (Taeniornynchus), 492 
Rio de Janeiro, 61 
Rossi (Anopheles), 49 1 
Roumania, 62, 68 
Rufus (Culex), 429 
Rural yellow fever, 78 
Russia, 37 Scales, 4, 8, 401, 448, 700 
Scaling 
of abdomen, 401,454 
of halteres, 401, 453 
of head, 24, 25, 398, 400, 401 
of legs, 400 
of scutellum, 24, 435 
of thorax, 25, 27,400, 434, 435, 436 
of varietal forms, 27, 29 
of wing, 26,401,444,448 
Screening, 89 
Scutellar pulsatile organ, 6 19 
Scutellaris (Acdes), 60, 61, 64, 67, 81, 457, 505, 
533 
Scutellaris group, 24, 32 
Scutellum, 24, 25, 27, 434, 435, 452, 592 
Scutum, 434, 435, 452 
Seaports, association with, 40 
Sense organs, see Special sense organs 
Sensory hairs, papillae or pits 
of the buccal cavity, 571, 664 
of the coxae and trochanters, 440, 664 
of the female maxillary palps, 663 
of the halteres, 453, 660 
of the imaginal antenna, 633 
of the labial plate, 208, 326 
of the labrum, 428 
of the larval antenna, 326 
of the larval maxillary palps, 206, 326 
of the legs, 440, 664 
of the pupal abdomen, 364 
of the respiratory siphon, 220, 326 
of the wings, 450, 664 
Serosa, 138, 178, 183 
Settling rate, 479 
Sexes 
imago 
Sacculus ejaculatorius, 680 
Saddle plate and hair, 197, 241 
Sahara, 30,40, 42, 43, 58 
St Helena, 37 
St Lucia, 27 
Salinity 
effect on anal papillae, 268, 710 
of breeding places, 59, 268 behaviour, 50 1 
distinction of, 499 
food of, 468 
order of emergence, 501 
proportion of, 499 
larva 
distinction of, 348 
the pupa, 363, 382 
Seychelles, 27, 38, 43 
Shipping, 40, 55, 57, 85 
Sierra Leone, 30, 58 
735 
INDEX 
Silver staining, 626 
Simpsoni (At?des), 25, 26, 79, 80, 540 
Singapore, 43 
Siphon, see Respiratory siphon 
Size, 56, 266, 277, 406 
Skins, cast, larval and pupal, 117, 228, 232, 363 
Smell, reaction to, 476, 533 
Soap, effect of, 168, 269, 388 
Society Islands, 41 
Sodium chloride, regulation of, 709 
Solicitans (Culex), 68 
Somaliland, 62 
Special sense organs 
of the halteres, 453, 660 
of the imago, 648 
Johnston’s organ, 8, 535, 658 
of the larva, 325 
see also Compound eyes, Ocelli, Sensory hairs, 
Papillae or pits 
Specific gravity 
of the egg, 140 
of the imago, 415 
of the larva, 251 
of the pupa, 383 
Spermathecae, 346, 351, 674, 678, 679 
Spermathecal ducts and opening, 35 1,464,465,679 
Spermatogenesis, 684, 691 
Spermatozoa, 684 
Spiracles 
abdominal, 456, 605, 613 
structure of, 602 
terminal (of larva), 220, 298 
thoracic, 435, 436, 602, 605 
Spiracular muscles, 222, 590, 592, 604, 605 
Spiracular parts (mechanism of), 253 
Spiracular puncta, 298 
Spiracular trachea, 300, 605, 608, 612 
Spirochaetes, 65 
Spraying 
as adult insecticide, 86, 555, 556 
in aircraft disinfection, 88 
as larvicide, 86 
pyrethrins, use in, 556, 557 
residual, 84, 87, 555 
use of ‘Freon’ in, 556 
Squama, 444,446,450,451,519 
Stains 
for fat-body, 340 
for marking mosquitoes, 516 
for sections, 124 
for silver impregnation, 626 
Starvation, effect of, 56, 266, 277, 412 
Stegomyia (subgenus), 10, 21, 24, 25, 26, 66, 197, 
441,442 
Stephensi (Anopheles), 492 
Sterilising viable eggs, 151 
Sternal area (of thorax), 436 
Sternopleuron, 434, 435, 452 
Stigma1 plate, 220, 253 
Stimulans (Culex), 573 ‘Stimulants irresistible’, 175 
Stimuli 
see under Feeding, Oviposition 
Stipes, 421 
Stomatogastric, 320, 323, 341, 643 
Stomodaeum (stomodaeal area), 178,185, 186,571 
Storing eggs, 112 
Strains (of Agdes aegypti), 31 
Striated border, 294, 296, 344, 345, 576, 668 
Stroboscope, 517,523, 527 
Subargenteus (Aedes), 25, 26 
Suboesophageal ganglion, 320, 635 
Subpictus (Anopheles), 262, 49 1 
Sudan, 40, 43, 55, 62, 78 
Sugar 
attractiveness of different sugars, 471 
egg production and, 110, 511, 677 
as food, 468, 470 
used for maintenance, 476 
Surface area 
of egg, 142 
of pupa, 382 
of stigma1 plate, 255 
Surface tension 
effect on eggs, 134 
on pupal trumpets, 383, 388 
on respiratory siphon, 254, 255 
Survival rate, 549 
Sweat, human 
as attractant to feed, 476, 533, 537, 540 
effect on human skin, 469 
males sucking, 34, 494 
Sylvan yellow fever, 12, 77, 78 
Sympathetic nervous system, 324 
Synonyms (of Ai;des aegypti), list with localities, 23 
Synonymy (of AZdes aegypti), 21 
Synthetic chlorinated compounds, 84,87, 554,555, 
557 
Syria, 28,55 
Systematics, 9, 24 
Tanganyika, 43 
Tarsal claws, 8, 24, 440, 441 
Tarsal sensory organs, 664 
Tarsalis (Culex), 388 
Tasmania, 65 
Tautotomy, 554 
Technique 
apparatus, 100-7 
culture medium for rearing, 108-l 1 
feeding for egg stock, 111 
manipulation of adults, 119-22 
manipulation of eggs, 112-14 
manipulation of larvae and pupae, 115-19 
for rearing and maintenance, 110 
for reconstruction from sections, 125 
sectioning, 122-5 
special techniques, 125 
for study of muscles, 3 10 
tracheal injection, 600 
736 
INDEX 
Temperature 
and duration of imaginal life, 548 
and duration of larval period, 245 
and duration of life cycle, 55 
and duration of pupal period, 388 
effect on heart beat rate. 709 
and incubation time, 170 
as limit of activity, 55, 474 
as limit to copulation, 39 
as limit to distribution, 36, 38 
as limit to effective development, 264 
as limit to maintenance of species, 38, 550, 551, 
552 
optimal for the species, 474, 551 
and ovarian development, 39, 56, 507, 544 
and rate of growth, 277 
and size of imago, 266 
thermal death point (high) 
for the egg, 150 
for the imago, 551 
for the larva, 262 
for the pupa, 386 
thermal death point (low) 
for the egg, 150 
for the imago, 550 
for the larva, 39, 263 
for the pupa, 386 
Terminalia 
of the female, 346, 351, 464, 664, 679 
of the male, 26, 28, 348, 456 
of the pupa, 362 
Territans (Culex), 530 
Tesselated membrane, 200, 204 
Tessellatus (Anopheles), 65 
Testis, 346, 681 
Thalasseus (Culex), 79 
Theileri (Culex), 34 
Theobaldia (genus), 8,34,67,338,491,492,522,602 
Thermal death point, see under Temperature 
Thorax 
imago 
description, 409, 431 
chaetae, 404, 432, 438 
list of muscles, 590 
list of nerves, 639 
measurements, 408 
meso- and metathorax, 434 
musculature, 582, 588, 590, 587, 605 
nerves of, 636, 639, 642 
ornamentation, 24, 27, 29, 398 
pleurae, 435, 452, 605 
prothorax, 432 
scaling of, 25, 27, 400, 434, 435, 436 
scutellar pulsatile organ, 619 
scutellum, 24, 435 
scutum, 434, 435, 452 
segmentation, 43 1 
spiracles, 435, 436, 602, 605 
sternal area, 436 
thoracic fat-body, 620 tracheation, 602, 605, 606, 610 
ventral nerve chain ganglia, 635 
larva 
description, 194 
chaetotaxy, 212, 236 
list of tracheae, 304 
measurements, 279, 280 
musculature, 245, 310 
segmentation, 208 
thoracic ganglia, 323 
thoracic puncta, 298 
tracheation, 303 
pupa 
description, 360 
chaetotaxy, 366 
imaginal buds, 360 
musculature, 374, 597 
respiratory trumpets, 4.v. 
thoracic ganglia, 379 
tracheae, list of, 369 
ventral air space, 361 
Tibiae, 26, 440, 441 
Togo, 58 
Tokyo, 37 
Tormae, 429 
Tormogen cells, 700 
Toxaphene, 556 
Tracheae, lists of 
for imago, 606 
for larva, 304 
for pupa, 369 
Tracheal branching, 302, 368,602 
Tracheal cells (stellate cells), 302 
Tracheal commissures, 300,304,369,370,606, 609 
Tracheal injection (technique of), 600 
Tracheal knots, 303, 602, 605, 612, 613 
Tracheal nomenclature, 300 
Tracheal plexus, 33 1 
Tracheal system 
at ecdysis, 231 
at eclosion, 165 
at emergence, 394 
of the imago, 600-13 
of instar I, 237 
of later instars, 238 
of the larva, 298-305 
of the prepupa, 245 
of the pupa, 367-70 
at pupation, 249 
Tracheal trunks, 165,299, 369, 613, 615 
Tracheal volume, 702 
Tracheation 
of the abdomen, 302,305, 368, 369, 608, 612 
of the head, 304,609 
of the thorax, 303, 369, 602, 606, 610 
of the wing, 448, 611 
Tracheoles, 302, 702 
Trade, association with, 42 
Transport (of AZdes aegypti), 55 
Transvaal, 40, 43 
737 
INDEX 
Traps, mosquito, 58, 87 Ventral sympathetic system (of larva), 324 
Travellers’ tales, 6 Ventricular (gastric) ganglion, 342 
Treasury Islands, 41 Ventriculus, see Mid-gut 
Tree-holes, 28, 43, 58, 61 Vertex, 24, 420, 424, 648 
Trematodes, 67 Vertical plates (of pupa), 358 
Trichogen cells, 700 Viability 
Trichoid sensilla, 663 of the egg, 147 
Trichoprosopon (genus), 79 of the imago, 548 
Trinidad, 37, 59 of the larva, 259, 262, 266, 268 
Trinidad (Atides), 26 of the pupa, 385 
Tristan da Cunha, 37 Vinsoni (Atfdes), 25 
Tritocerebrum, 192, 322, 627 Virginia, 37 
Trochanters, 440 Virus diseases, 82 
Trophocytes, 621 Visceral nervous system, 320, 323,341, 643 
Trumpets, respiratory, see Respiratory trumpets Visual response (in flight), 530 
Tubular tunnels (from mites), 68 Visual stimuli, 56, 258, 530, 541 
Type (of Ai;des aegypti), 22 Vittatus (AZdes), 26 
Type form (of AZdes aegypti), 28, 29, 35, 42 Volume 
Type species (of Ad;des), 9, 24 of the egg, 141, 144 
Type species (of Stegonzyia), 21, 24 of the imago, 415 
Type localities of synonyms (of A@des aegypti), of the larva, 253 
23 of the pupa, 383 
Uganda, 28, 29, 43, 78 Wake Island, 37, 41 
Unfertilised eggs, 145 Warmth (attraction by) 
Unfertilised females, oviposition by, 5 11 heat gradient, 542 
Ungues, 440, 596 warm body, 476, 536 
Unguiculus, 45 1 warm convection currents, see Convection 
Unguifer, 442 currents 
Ungoid process, 452 warm human skin, 446, 537, 540 
Urban yellow fever, 77, 80 Water 
Urine (secretion of by imago), 489, 493 of breeding-places, 54, 58, 268 
United States, 62 open-water breeders and pharynx, 54 
Uruguay, 39, 59 selected for oviposition, 504 
Utah, 36 storage of favouring species, 40 
Water-closets, breeding in, 57 
Vaccines (for yellow fever), 80 Water-supply, as control measure, 55, 85 
Vagina, 346, 351, 465, 674, 679, 680 Waterproofing of egg, 154 
Vaginal apodeme, 346, 678 Waxy coat of pupa, 384 
Vagus (Anopheles), 262,491 Weighing, methods of, 120 
Vapours (as larvicides), 85, 270, 388 Weight 
Varietal forms (of AZdes aegypti), 27, 35, 40, 42, of the egg, 139 
43 of the egg-shell, 142 
Vasa deferentia, 348, 680, 681, 682 of the imago, 410,412 
Vasa efferentia, 680, 681 of the imago dry weight, 416 
Vectors of the imago following blood meal, 493 
of dengue, 81 of instars (growth), 251, 281, 282, 284, 285 
of virus and other diseases, 28, 31, 82 of the larva, 251, 253,285 
of yellow fever, 6, 9, 11, 28, 31, 77, 79, 80 of the pupa, 382 
Venation, see Wing venation relation to linear measurement, 282 
Ventral air space (of pupa), 361 relation to wing length, 412 
Ventral diaphragm, 619, 708 Wells, breeding in, 58 
Ventral diverticulum, 488, 489, 565, 573 West Africa, 23, 26, 28, 30, 38, 42, 43, 55, 57, 58, 
Ventral fan, 197, 209, 217 60, 61, 65, 79 
Ventral nephrocytes, 336, 620 West Indies, 2, 12, 21, 23, 42, 43, 55, 62, 67 
Ventral nerve cord West Nile virus, 82 
of embryo, 190, 192 Western Europe, 36 
of the imago, 635 Wheals, description and use of, 479, 480, 
of the larva, 238, 320,323 494-6 
of the pupa, 379 White eyed mutant, 35 
738 
INDEX 
Wild birds (as virus reservoirs), 80, 82 
Wing 
description, 442-54 
area of, 410 
basal sclerites of, 451, 518 
base of, 449 
imaginal buds of, 244, 360 
measurements 
length, 100, 120, 408, 409, 411, 412 
method of mounting for, 120 
as index of size, 409 
comparison with weight, 412 
movements 
extension and flexion, 5 19 
in flight, 518 
wing-stroke frequency, 520-5 
muscles of, 590, 59 1, 697 
ornamentation, 26, 40 1 
pleural attachments of, 452 
the remigium, 450, 5 18, 644 
scaling, 400, 444, 448 
tracheation, 448, 611 
venation 
description, 446 
development, 448 
generalised scheme of, 447 
notation, 446 
Winter, effect of, see Overwintering 
Woodi (&des), 25, 26 Wyeomyia (genus), 464 
Yeasts as larval food, 261 
Yeasts as parasites, 64 
Yellow fever 
A2de.s aegypti as vector, 6, 9, 11, 12, 28, 3 1, 77, 
78, 79, 80 
distribution, 78 
early work on, 11, 77, 78 
epidemics of, 12, 77, 78, 79 
Finlay’s work on, 6, 12 
forest, sylvan or jungle yellow fever, 12, 40, 78, 
79, 80 
infective period of, 80 
monkeys and other animal virus reservoirs, 78, 
79, 80 
mouse test in, 79 
rural yellow fever, 78 
urban yellow fever, 77, 80 
vaccines for, 80 
vectors of, 79, 80 
virus of, 80 
Yemen, 43 
Yolk, 145, 676, 677 
Zanzibar, 43 
Zika virus, 82 
Zoogeographical regions, 35,44 
Zululand, 42, 43 

